ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHYSICS 
EDITED BY 
S. FLOGGE 
VOLUME 111/1 
PRINCIPLES OF CLASSICAL MECHANICS 
AND FIELD THEORY 
WITH 106 FIGURES 
SPRINGER-VERLAG BERLIN HEIDELBERG GMBH 
1960 
HANDBUCH DER PHYSIK 
HERAUSGEGEBEN VON 
S. FLOGGE 
BAND III/1 
PRINZIPIEN DER KLASSISCHEN MECHANIK 
UNO FELDTHEORIE 
MIT 106 FIGUREN 
SPRINGER-VERLAG BERLIN HEIDELBERG GMBH 
1960 
ISBN 978-3-540-02547-4 ISBN 978-3-642-45943-6 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-45943-6 
Alle Rechte, insbesondere das der Obersetzung in fremde Sprachen, vorbehalten. 
Ohne ausdriickliche Genehmigung des Verlages ist es auch nicht gestattet, dieses 
Buch oder Teile daraus auf photomechanischem Wege (Photokopie, Mikrokopie) 
zu vervielfiiltigen. 
©by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1960 
Urspriinglich erschienen bei Springer-Verlag OHG. Berlin • Giittingen • Heidelberg 1960 
Softcover reprint oftbe hardcover 1st edition 1960 
Die Wiedergabe von Gebrauchsnamen, Handelsnamen, Warenbezeichnungen usw. 
in diesem Werk berechtigt auch ohne besondere Kennzeichnung nicht zu der 
Annahme, daB solche Namen im Sinn der Warenzeichen- und MarkenschutzGesetzgebung als frei zu betrachten waren und daher von jedermann benutzt 
werden diirften. 
Contents. 
Page 
Classical Dynamics. By Professor Dr. JOHN L. SYNGE, School of Theoretical Physics, 
Institute for Advanced Studies, Dublin (Ireland). (With 57 Figures) 
A. Introduction 
B. Kinematics . 12 
I. Displacements of rigid bodies 12 
II. Kinematics . 25 
III. Mass distributions and force systems . 31 
IV. Generalized coordinates 38 
C. Dynamics of a particle . 43 
I. Equations of motion . 43 
II. One-dimensional motions 46 
III. Two-dimensional motions . 48 
IV. Three-dimensional motions 53 
D. Dynamics of systems of particles and of rigid bodies . 56 
I. Equations of motion . 56 
II. Systems without constraints 69 
III. Rigid body with a fixed point . 82 
E. General dynamical theory 98 
I. Geometrical representations of dynamics 98 
II. The space of events(Q T). 105 
III. Momentum-energy space (PH) 130 
IV. Configuration space (Q) ... 134 
v. The space of states and energy ( Q T PH) 143 
VI. The space of states ( Q T P) 163 
VII. Phase space (PQ) 167 
VIII. Small oscillations 180 
F. Relativistic dynamics 198 
I. Minkowskian space-time and the laws of dynamics . 198 
II. Some special dynamical problems 210 
III. De Broglie waves 215 
IV. Relativistic catastrophes 217 
General references. 223 
The Classical Field Theories. By Professor Dr. C. TRUESDELL, Bloomington, Indiana 
and Dr. R.A. TouPIN, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. (USA). 
(With 47 Figures) . . . . . . . . . . . 226 
A. The field viewpoint in classical physics . 226 
B. Motion and mass . . . . . . . 240 
I. Deformation . . . . . . 241 
a) Deformation gradients. 241 
b) Strain . . . . . . . 255 
c) Rotation. . . . . . 274 
d) Special deformations 283 
e) Small deformation 303 
f) Oriented bodies . . . 309 
VI Contents. 
II. Motion ..... . 325 
a) Velocity . . . . 325 
b) Material systems 337 
c) Stretching and spin 347 
d) Acceleration . . . 374 
e) Special developments concerning vorticity 385 
ei) The vorticity field . . 385 
ell) Vorticity averages. . . . . . . . 396 
e III) Bernoullian theorems . . . . . . 402 
eiV) Convection and diffusion of vorticity. 409 
f) Further special motions 430 
g) Relative motion 437 
III. Mass . . . . . . . . . . 464 
a) Definition of mass. . . 464 
b) Solution of the equation of continuity 474 
c) Momentum. . . . . . . . 481 
C. Singular surfaces and waves . . . . 491 
I. Geometry of singular surfaces . 492 
II. The motion of surfaces . . . . 498 
III. Kinematics of singular surfaces 503 
IV. Singular surfaces associated with a motion 506 
V. Discontinuous equations of balance 525 
D. Stress . . . . . . . . . . . . 530 
I. The balance of momentum . . 531 
II. The stress principle . . . . . 536 
III. Applications of CAUCHY's laws 568 
IV. General solutions of the equations of motion 582 
V. Variational principles 594 
E. Energy and entropy . . . . 607 
I. The balance of energy 608 
II. Entropy . . . . . . 615 
a) The caloric equation of state 615 
b) The production of entropy 638 
III. Equilibrium. . . . 647 
F. Charge and magnetic flux 660 
I. Introduction . . . 660 
II. The conservation of charge and magnetic flux . 666 
III. The Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations 677 
IV. Conservation of energy and momentum. 689 
G. Constitutive equations . . . . . . . . . . . 700 
I. Generalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . 700 
II. Examples of kinematical constitutive equations 704 
III. Example of an energetic constitutive equation. 709 
IV. Examples of mechanical constitutive equations 710 
V. Examples of thermo-mechanical constitutive equations . 734 
VI. Electromagnetic constitutive equations . . 736 
VII. Electromechanical constitutive equations . . . . . . . 742 
List of works cited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 744 
Additional Bibliography K: Kinematics of special motions (geometrical theory) 784 
Additional Bibliography N: Non-relativistic kinematics and mechanics in generalized 
spaces ..................... . 
Additional Bibliography P: Principles of mechanics ... . 
Additional Bibliography R: Relativistic continuum theories 
787 
788 
790 
Contents. VII 
Appendix. Tensor Fields. By Dr. J. L. ERICKSEN, Associate Professor of Theoretical Mechanics, Mechanical Engineering Department, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Md. (USA). (With 2 Figures) . . . . . . . . . . . . 794 
I. Preliminaries . . . . . . . . 794 
a) Notation. . . . . . . . . . . . 794 
b) Use of complex co-ordinates . . . 796 
II. Dimensions and physical components. 797 
a) Dimensions of a tensor and its components . 797 
b) Physical components . . 802 
III. Double tensor fields . . . . 805 
a) Definition and examples . 805 
b) The total covariant derivative 810 
IV. Integrals of tensor fields 813 
a) Preliminaries . . . . . . . . 813 
b) Circulation, flux, total, and moments 814 
c) The transformation of GREEN and KELVIN 815 
V. Vector fields 
a) Vector lines, sheets, and tubes 
b) Special classes of fields 
c) Potentials . . . . . . . . 
VI. Tensors of order two . . . . . 
a) Proper numbers and vectors 
b) Powers and matrix polynomials. 
c) Decompositions . . . . . . . 
d) Normal and shear components 
e) Tensor lines and sheets 
References ......... . 
Sachverzeichnis (Deutsch-Englisch) 
Subject Index (English-German) . . 
817 
817 
819 
828 
829 
829 
837 
840 
844 
847 
850 
859 
881 
Classical Dynamics. 
By 
J. L. SYNGE. 
With 57 Figures. 
A. Introduction. 
1. Classical dynamics defined. Its applicability. For about two centuries 
(1700 to 1900) physicists recognized only one dynamical theory1• Now three 
theories exist, of which the third may be subdivided: 
(i) Newtonian dynamics. 
(ii) Relativistic dynamics (with quantum theory excluded). 
(iii) (a) Newtonian quantum dynamics, based on the absolute space and time 
of NEWTON. 
(b) Relativistic quantum dynamics, based on the flat space-time of 
MINKOWSKI or the curved space-time of EINSTEIN. 
The present article is confined to (i) and (ii), which are separated sharply 
from (iii) on the philosophical question of determinacy versus indeterminacy. But 
only parts of (i) and (ii) are included, statics being entirely omitted, and also 
the dynamics of continua (dealt with in other articles mainly in Vol. VI); in 
relativity only the special theory is considered, and that briefly, in view of other 
articles. 
In fact, for present purposes classical dynamics means the dynamics 2 of 
particles and rigid bodies, with emphasis on general theory; the essential kinematical preliminaries are included, with finite displacements, mass geometry, 
force systems, and generalized coordinates. 
As regards the applicability of classical dynamics, it may be said at once 
that Newtonian dynamics describes physical phenomena excellently under what 
may be called "ordinary circumstances", i.e. when applied to problems of engineering or to physical problems involving systems which are neither very large 
nor very small. Such discrepancies between theory and experiment as do occur 
may usually be traced to oversimplification in the mathematical model used (see 
1 The present article contains only incidental historical references. For the history of 
dynamics, see R. DUGAS, Histoire de la Mecanique (Neuchatel: Editions du Griffon 1950) 
and also La Mecanique au XVIIe Siecle (same publisher, 1954). Many detailed historical 
references will also be found in Voss [27] and WHITTAKER [28] (see List ot General References, 
p. 223). 
2 According to present custom, the word mechanics embraces dynamics and statics, 
dynamics dealing with systems in motion and statics with systems at rest. This usage disregards the literal meaning of dynamics (t5iivapL>; =force), and was deprecated by Sir WILLIAM 
THOMSON (Lord KELVIN) and P. G. TAIT in the following words: "Keeping in view the proprieties of language, and following the example of the most logical writers, we employ. the 
word Dynamics in its true sense as the science which treats of the action of force, whether it 
maintains relative rest, or produces acceleration of relative motion. The two correspoiioing 
divisions of Dynamics are thus conveniently entitled Statics and Kinetics". (Preface to 
Treatise on Natural Philosophy, Vol. 1, Part. 1. Cambridge: University Press 1879-) But the 
word kinetics did not catch on, perhaps on account of its too great resemblance to kinematics. 
It was, however, used in the German form (Kinetik) by GRAMMEL [8] p. 305 and WINKEl-· 
MANN and GRAMMEL [29] p. 373. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 
2 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 1. 
Sect. 2), such as neglect of friction in the model, or the replacement of a (physically) elastic body by a (mathematically) rigid one. 
Newtonian dynamics may also be used successfully in the kinetic theory of 
gases and in celestial mechanics (but see below). Defects in prediction appear 
when (i) relative speeds (u) are not small compared with the speed of light (c), 
or (ii) masses of atomic size are involved. Since high speeds are attainable in 
a laboratory only for very light particles, these two conditions are not distinct 
practically from one another. But we may separate them for purposes of analysis. 
They represent (i) the boundary where Newtonian dynamics must be replaced 
by relativistic dynamics, and (ii) the boundary where classical dynamics must 
be replaced by quantum dynamics. 
Errors of order (ujc) 2 appear when Newtonian dynamics is applied to bodies 
in rapid motion. But it is not possible to assess in any such simple way the 
errors committed when classical dynamics is applied to problems on the atomic 
scale. Although quantum dynamics uses many of the old words, the mathematical 
concepts corresponding to them are radically different from those of classical 
dynamics, and one no longer attempts to formulate atomic problems in a classical 
way with any feeling of confidence. However, the classical concepts are not 
wholly abandoned even there, the conservation of momentum and energy, for 
example, being employed in problems of collision, annihilation or creation of 
particles on the atomic or subatomic scale (cf. Sect. 120 et seq.). 
In celestial mechanics, Newtonian dynamics remains the standard basis for 
computations, and it is remarkably successful. Nevertheless certain small discrepancies between prediction and observation exist!, the most noteworthy being 
an excess in the rotation of the perihelion of Mercury. This is more simply explained by EINSTEIN's general theory of relativity than by special Newtonian 
causes introduced to explain it. One concludes that EINSTEIN's theory is the 
better mathematical model 2, and that Newtonian dynamics must be used with 
caution in very refined calculations in celestial mechanics. 
Newtonian dynamics may be used in cosmology3, as an alternative to the 
general theory of relativity or MILNE's kinematical cosmology. The nature of 
the subject is such that it is hardly possible to say to what extent any of the 
proposed theories agree with observation. 
However, the scientific importance of classical dynamics, Newtonian dynamics 
in particular, is not to be assessed solely in terms of physical predictions made 
directly out of it. Newtonian dynamics consists of a body of mathematical 
conclusions obtained by subjecting certain simple concepts to certain simple 
laws. In the mathematical development of the subject, general procedures are 
evolved (Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods in particular) in which it is 
convenient to replace the original primitive concepts by more general ones 
(such as configuration-space and phase-space). It is found that these new mathematical concepts may be taken to represent physical concepts different from 
those originally envisaged, and so Newtonian dynamics gives birth to new physical 
conclusions by applying the mathematical ideas inherent in it outside their 
1 Cf. J. CHAZY: Tht\orie de la Relativite et la mecanique celeste, Tome 1, Chap. IV, v. 
Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1928. - G. C. McVITTIE: General Relativity and Cosmology, Chap: V. 
New York: Wiley 1956. 2 WHITEHEAD's theory of gravitation, based on the special theory of relativity, gives 
the same rotation of perihelion as EINSTEIN's general theory of relativity [cf. A. S. EDDINGTON: Nature, Lond. 113, 192 ( 1924); J. L. SYNGE: Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., Ser. A 211, 303 
(1952)]. 3 For discussion and references, see H. BoNDI: Cosmology, pp. 7 5, 172. Cambridge: University Press 1952. 
Sect. 2. Mathematical maps or models. 3 
original domain. Examples are the application of Lagrangian methods to electrical circuit theory, and (more striking) the application of Hamiltonian methods 
in the development of quantum mechan~cs. 
To pursue this matter a little further, it may be remarked that Newtonian 
dynamics sets before us for solution sets of ordinary differential equations, and 
we might therefore classify the subject mathematically as ODE. Hamiltonian 
methods introduce partial differential equations of the first order, and, when 
so considered, dynamics might be called PDE1 . The transition to quantum 
theory via the SCHRODINGER equation involves a passage to partial differential 
equations of the second order, with consequent classification as PDE2 • Viewed 
in the light of this process of mathematical development (ODE~PDEc+PDE ), 
Newtonian dynamics takes on a significance much greater than that indicated 
by its original scope; it is the parent of new theories in which the original concepts 
are generalized and rarified, though never entirely lost sight of. 
2. Mathematical maps or models. To adapt a famous definition of geometry, 
physics is what physicists do. Among physicists at large, there is comparatively 
little inquiry into why or how they do what they are doing, and this is not to 
be deprecated, because human activities are inhibited by introspection. But 
there are occasions when a greater danger of intellectual confusion over-shadows 
the danger of self-analysis. How is it, we ask, that we can tolerate the co-existence of several different dynamical theories, all purporting to describe the behaviour of one single natural world? Is one true, and the others false? Or are 
all false? There is no doubt that these several theories exist, because men work 
at them. Nature also exists. The question is: How are these theories related to 
nature? 
A satisfying answer is not to be found in discussing whether or not a certain 
theory gives, or does not give, accurate predictions of the results of certain 
experiments. The question goes deeper, and it seems possible to approach an 
answer only by recognizing that, however much they may have been inspired 
by nature, mathematical theories are no more than maps or models of nature. 
A "particle" of the natural world (planet, atom or electron) is no more to be 
confused with the "particle" which represents it in dynamical theory than a 
city is to be confused with the ink-spot which represents it on a map. But even 
this analogy does not do justice to the immense gulf separating the natural 
world from mathematical treatments of it. For an ink-spot on a sheet of paper 
does at least exist in the natural world (like the city it represents), whereas the 
essence of the mathematical map or model exists only in the mind, even though 
the mathematical symbols are written down on paper; mathematic~.! openations 
involving infinity (differentiation and integration) are purely intellectual concepts, and belong to nature only in so far as the human mind belongs to nature. 
If it is admitted that mathematical models are to be sharply distinguished 
from nature, what, then, is their relationship to nature? The relationship seems 
to be based on certain concepts, the names of which provide a common language 
for all physicists, experimental and mathematical. These concepts appear as 
mathematicalconceptsin the model and as physical concepts in the direct discussion 
of nature. We have, as it were, a dictionary with three columns: 
N arne of concept 
Mass 
Mathematical concept Physical concept 
A positive number (m) The quantity of matter in a body. A measure of 
the reluctance of a body to chanpe its velocity. 
A measure of the capacity of a l:iody to attract 
another gravitationally. 
1* 
4 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 2. 
A sample row of entries is shown. The entries in the first two columns are complete. But the third entry is only suggestive, for the physical concept demands 
for its description an account of all the ways in which the idea of mass enters 
into our understanding of nature, and indeed no description in words can suffice 
since part of our appreciation of mass arises from muscular sensations and cannot 
be completely described. 
This hypothetical dictionary is used as follows. A physical problem is first 
formulated in terms of physical concepts. It is then translated into mathematical 
concepts by using the same words, now with their mathematical meanings. 
Mathematical laws (usually differential equations) are found by a similar translation of physical laws, first stated in terms of physical concepts. The application of these laws to the problem in question then presents a problem in pure 
mathematics, and, when this problem has been solved, the conclusion is translated into terms of reality by restoring to the words their physical meanings. 
Such a description of standard procedure in theoretical physics would have 
appeared ridiculously elaborate a century ago, at which time (even in geometry) 
there was no clear distinction between physical and mathematical concepts 
(even in the minds of mathematicians). This distinction is essential for pure 
mathematics today, since otherwise mathematical reasoning would be confused 
by contact with the confusions of nature. But physicists today may rightly and 
honestly dispute the distinction, since it may be their practice and wish to keep 
mathematical concepts inextricably mixed with physical concepts as a fertile 
source of new ideas. Clarity and fecundity of thought are not one thing. 
If the analysis given above is accepted, it clears up the question regardmg 
the co-existence of several dynamical theories. No one of these theories is true, 
any more than a map is a true representation of a country. And, as it is convenient 
to have a variety of maps (on different scales) in order to study the geography of 
a country, so it is convenient to have a number of maps or models of nature. 
It is easy to exaggerate the differences between the various models; under ordinary 
circumstances (cf. Sect. 1) they yield the same information. 
It is interesting to compare the above ideas with those of BRIDGMAN1. According to his operational method, concepts are defined in terms of physical operations; the concept is synonymous with the corresponding set of operations. Thus, 
for example, the concept of absolute Newtonian time is to be abandoned because 
it is impossible to describe experiments by which it ma:y be measured. 
This would mean that, in the hypothetical dictionary, the first column would 
read "absolute time" and the second column "a number t", but the third column 
would be blank, there being no corresponding physical concept. But is this, in 
fact, the case? There are many physicists, astronomers and engineers who use 
the word time to refer to a variable t which occurs in certain equations. When 
they have solved the equations, they pass from their formulae to physical reality, 
making predictions which are sometimes of very great accuracy, as in celestial 
mechanics. It is clear that, in their dictionaries, the third column is not blank. 
If it were, they could not use their results for physical prediction. True, there 
may be no words in the third column; the entry may lie in the subconscious, 
in which a great deal of our thought takes place. But an entry of some sort 
there must be, since otherwise a formula assigning a numerical value to a variable t 
could not be translated into instructions to direct a telescope in a certain definite 
manner. 
1 P. W. BRIDGMAN: The Logic of Modern Physics, p. s. New York: MacMillan 1951. 
See alsoP. W. BRIDGMAN: The Nature of some of our Physical Concepts. New York: Philosophical Library 19 52. 
Sects. 3. 4. Newtonian and relativistic dynamics of a particle. 5 
Valuable as the operational method is in clarifying our ideas, it seems that 
physical concepts are too complex and confused for us to demand that they 
should always satisfy the operational test. 
3. Axiomatics. The word logic has a wide range of meanings, according to 
context, from the ordinary logic of daily intercourse, through the logic of the 
expert diagnostician or detective, to the basic logic of twentieth century mathematics1, and beyond that to the more recent developments of mathematical 
logic. Physical concepts, being by their nature vague, cannot be treated with 
logical rigour. On the other hand, classical dynamics, if regarded as a purely 
mathematical theory, admits of an axiomatic basis, as developed by HAMEL [10] 
and others 2• Therefore it would seem right that any systematic treatment of 
classical dynamics should start with axioms, carefully laid down, on which the 
whole structure would rest as a house rests on its foundations. 
The analogy to a house is, however, a false one. Theories are created in midair, so to speak, and develop both upward and downward. Neither process is 
ever completed. Upward, the ramifications can extend indefinitely; downward, 
the axiomatic base must be rebuilt continually as our views change as to what 
constitutes logical precision. Indeed, there is little promise of finality here, 
as we seem to be moving towards the idea that logic is a man-made thing, a 
game played according to rules to some extent arbitrary. 
To a physicist thoroughly familiar with classical dynamics, as traditionally 
understood, there is an element of artificiality in the creation of a complete 
axiomatic base, for he knows that the axioms will be chosen to fit the theory, 
which he believes he understands already with reasonable clarity, and that the 
theory will not be changed at all as a result of the axiomatics. But when such 
a physicist is faced by two different theories and seeks to understand wherein 
they agree and wherein they differ, he is forced back towards axiomatics in 
order to understand the agreement and the difference. It might be said that 
axiomatics spring to life, and promise intellectual excitement outside a restricted 
circle of axiomatic specialists, only when one seriously considers the creation 
of new theories by changing the axioms-new theories with physical significance. 
Therefore, although this article does not offer a treatment of classical dynamics 
which can be regarded as axiomatic in the modern sense, the relationship between 
Newtonian dynamics and relativistic dynamics is so interesting that the next 
two sections are devoted to a comparison between them based on a fairly axiomatic 
approach. 
4. Newtonian and relativistic dynamics of a particle. In this section, and the 
next, Newtonian dynamics will be denoted by ND and relativistic dynamics by RD. 
The word event is common to ND and RD. The mathematical concept of an 
event is a set of four numbers (coordinates) or equivalently a point in a fourdimensional space-time continuum, which is in fact the totality of events. The 
physical concept is a sharply localized occurrence of very brief duration. 
1 Any logical system, if it is to avoid vicious circles, must start with undefined terms and 
unproved propositions. Cf. 0. VEBLEN and J. W. YouNG: Projective Geometry, Vol. 1, p. 1. 
Boston: Ginn 1910. 2 For some recent work on this, and references to older work, see J. C. C. McKINSEY, 
A. C. SuGAR and P. SuPPES: Axiomatic foundations of classical particle mechanics. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 253-272 (1953); J. C. C. McKINSEY and P. SuPPES: Transformations 
of systems of classical particle mechanics. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 273-289 (1953); 
J. C. C. McKINSEY and P. SuPPES: Philosophy and the axiomatic foundations of physics. 
Proc. Xlth Internat. Congr. of Philosophy, Vol. VI, p. 49-54, 1953; H. RuBIN and 
P. SUPPES: Transformations of systems of relativistic particle mechanics. Pacif. J. Math. 
4, 563-601 (1954). 
6 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 4. 
Throughout the rest of this section, and indeed throughout the whole article, 
concepts are considered only as mathematical concepts. As explained in Sect. 2, 
the corresponding physical concepts are sometimes extremely complicated; we 
cannot reason about them with a degree of precision suited to the present occasion. 
For these physical concepts, the reader must consult his own private threecolumn dictionary (cf. Sect. 2); if the required entry in the third column should 
happen to be non-existent, he must fill it from some other source of information. 
In ND an event has an absolute position and an absolute time (t). The totality 
of all possible positions form an absolute space of three dimensions. Two absolute 
positions define a distance, and absolute space is Euclidean when this distance 
is used as metric. This implies the existence of coordinates (x, y, z) such that 
the element of distance d a is 
da = (dx 2 + dy 2 + dz2)!. (4.1) 
There is a 1 : 1 correspondence between all possible events and the totality of 
tetrads (x, y, z, t), with variables in the range - oo to + oo. 
In RD (only the special theory of relativity is considered here) two events 
define a separation. There exist coordinates (x, y, z, t), ranging from- oo to+ oo, 
such that the separation ds between adjacent events is1 
ds = 1 dx2 + dy2 + dz2 - dt2 Jl. (4.2) 
There is a 1:1 correspondence between all possible events and the tetrads (x, y, z, t). 
The word particle is common to ND and RD. The history of a particle is a 
curve in space-time (world line), and may be described by equations of the form 
x=x(t), y=y(t), z=z(t). (4.3) 
In ND the derivatives of the functions in (4.3) (the components of velocity) 
may have any values. In RD these derivatives are bounded by 
( dx )2 ( dy )2 ( dz )2 dt +Tt +Tt < 1 • (4.4) 
so that along the world line of a particle we have 
ds = (dt2 - dx2 - dy 2 - dz2)l; (4.5) 
this is called the element of proper time. We may use proper time as parameter 
on a world line, writing its equations in the form 
x = x(s), y = y(s), z = z(s), t = t(s), (4.6) 
instead of as in (4.3). These four functions satisfy the equation 
(4.7) 
The word mass is common to ND and RD (also called proper mass in RD, 
but the single word mass will be used here). It is a number m associated with 
a particle 2 ; it may be constant, or it may vary along the world line. 
In ND a force with components (X, Y, Z) may act on a particle. In that case 
the world line satisfies the equations of motion 
:t (m ~;)=X, !_(m~) = y dt dt ' -~-(m!:.!___) =Z dt dt . (4.8) 
------
1 A factor c2 is usually inserted before dt2 in (4.2} (cf. Sect. 107}, but we can make c = 1 
by changing the unit in which t is measured. 2 In RD proper mass is often denoted by m0 , the symbol m being used forrelative mass 
(cf. Sect. 108). Note that, throughout this article, m means proper mass. 
Sect. 4. Newtonian and relativistic dynamics of a particle. 7 
If (X, Y, Z) are given functions of the quantities 
dx dy dz 
m, x, y, z, t, dt' lit' dt, (4.9) 
we say that the particle moves in a given field of force. In that case the equations 
of motion, together with an equation m = m (t) (usually m = const), determine 
a unique world line corresponding to assigned initial values of the quantities (4.9). 
In RD a four-force with components (X, Y, Z, T) may act on a particle. 
Then th.e equations of motion are 
d~(m~~)=X, :s(m~~)=Y, :s(m~;)=z, :s(m::)=T.(4.10) 
It follows from (4.7) that these equations of motion imply 
dm = T !!__-X !_x__- Y !_y- Z !_!__ (4.11) ds ds ds ds ds · 
If (X, Y, Z, T) are given functions of the quantities listed in (4.9) we say that 
the particle moves in a given field of force. Then the Eqs. (4.10) determine a 
unique world line, and also m along it, corresponding to assigned initial values 
of the quantities listed in (4.9). 
Let us now take m = const in ND and in RD. In ND the equations of motion 
read 
(4.12) 
In RD, we have by (4.11) 
T = X!:.!__ + Y !-!__ + Z _dz_ dt dt dt ' (4.13) 
so that only X, Y, Z, and not T, are to be regarded as arbitrarily assigned. The 
last equation in (4.1 0) is implied by the first three, and, if we take t for parameter, the equations of motion (4.10) may be written 
where 
p = X _ _ n:z_ '!_y_ d_x 
y2 y dt dt ' 
Q - 2'_ - !'!_ !1'_ dY_ 
- y2 y dt dt ' 
R _ Z m dy dz 
-?-rTt-a:t· 
1 
y = v1 - v2' 
d2 z m---=R dt 2 ' 
v2 = ( ~: r + ( -t:-r + ( ~; r 
(4.14) 
(4.15) 
If we compare the Eqs. (4.12) for ND with (4.14) for RD, we observe only 
a formal change from (X, Y, Z) to (P, Q, R). However there is a difference. 
Suppose (X, Y, Z) independent of velocity (dxjdt, dyjdt, dzjdt), as is often the 
case in ND. Then (P, Q, R) depend on velocity, tending to zero as v tends to 
unity, i.e. as y tends to infinity. This fact, and the inequality (4.4) connected 
with it, distinguishes RD from ND, as far as the motion, in a given field of force, 
of a particle of constant mass is concerned. 
8 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 5. 
A much more important difference between ND and RD emerges when we 
consider, not a single particle in a given field of force, but a system of particles. 
moving under forces which are due to the particles alone. 
5. Newtonian and relativistic dynamics of a system. To fix the ideas, consider 
two physical concepts: 
(i) the solar system, 
(ii) a free rigid1 body. 
For the solar system, Newtonian dynamics (ND) sets up as mathematical 
model a system of P particles with constant masses m; (i = 1, 2, ... P). For the 
several particles we have equations of motion of the form 
d2 z· m.--!-=Z· • dt2 .. (i = 1, 2, ... P), (5.1) 
the force (X;, Y;, Z;) being given, in accordance with NEWTON's law of gravitation, by 
X-= G m. ~ m;(x;- x;) ) s s.L.J a J 
r~; = (x;- ~;)2 + ~~- Y;)2 + (z;- z;)2, 
(5.2) 
with similar expressions for Y; and Z;. The summation for f is from f = 1 to 
f=P, with f=f=i; G is the gravitational constant. We have, then, in (5.1), (5.2) 
a set of equations adequate to determine (x;, Y;, z;) (i = 1, 2, ... P) as functions 
of t and of the values of 
(5.3) 
for t=O. 
For a free rigid body, we again take a system of P particles and the equations 
of motion (5.1). With these we associate conditions of rigidity: 
(5.4) 
where a1; are constants, the distances between the particles. As for the forces, 
they are taken to be of the form 
X;=~X;;. lj=~Y;,., Z;='f.Z;1, 
1 1 i 
X;;=- X1; = A;;(X;- X;). (5.6) 
(5.5) 
where 
Here Au(= A;;) are unknown; on eliminating them, we have in (5.1), (5.4), (5.5) 
(5.6) a set of equations adequate to determine (x;, Y;, z;) (i = 1, 2, ... P) as functions oft and the initial data (5.3). which must be chosen to satisfy (5.4) and the 
equations obtained by applying djdt to (5.4). 
These mathematical models of the solar system and of a rigid body are mathematically clear and physically satisfactory, in that a vast number of satisfactory 
physical predictions have been made by their use. But we may ask: What is 
the most general model of a system of particles of constant masses permissible 
in Newtonian dynamics? 
1 This word provides a good example of that confusion regarding physical concepts 
(Sect. 2) which makes it difficult to treat them logically. On one occasion, a physicist might 
say: "I mounted the interferometer on a rigid base" (meaning, perhaps, a block of stone). 
On another occasion he might say: "There are no rigid bodies" (meaning that any body is 
deformed by su~ficiently great stress). These statements are meaningful, when taken separately; taken together, they make nonsense, and would ruin any attempt at a logical argument. In a mathematical model this sort of confusion should not be allowed to occur. 
Sect. s. Newtonian and relativistic dynamics of a system. 9 
In attempting to answer this question, let us confine our attention to a system 
of P particles which is closed or isolated in the sense that all forces are due to 
these particles alone (and not to any external agency), and in which the particles 
are free in the sense that there are no rigid bonds between them. We write down 
3 P equations of motion of the form (5 .1), with the understanding that the forces 
(Xi,¥;, Zi) depend only on the instantaneous state of the system. For simplicity, let us suppose that they depend only on positions and velocities, so that 
they are functions of the 6 P quantities 
We ask: What functions are permissible? 
NEWTON's Third Law1 gives a partial answer, stating essentially that 
the forces exerted on one another by 
two particles, A and B, act on the 
line A B, in opposite senses and with 
a common magnitude. This is equivalent to saying that (Xi, Y;, Z;) are 
of the form shown in (5.5) and (5.6), 
but it gives no information as to the 
nature of the coefficients Aii except 
for the symmetry condition Aii = Ai;; 
they might be any functions of the 
quantities (5.7). A more complete 
answer to our question is given by 
the following Axiom of homogeneity 
(i = 1, 2 , ... P) . (5 .7) 
v 
Fig. 1. Interaction in Newtonian dynamics. 
and isotropy of space: The set of equations determining the motion of the system 
has the same form for all coordinate systems (x, y, z) obtained from one such 
coordinate system by a translation and rotation of axes. 
To enlarge on this, we note that (4.1) determines the coordinate system 
(rectangular Cartesian coordinates) only to within an orthogonal transformation 
(cf. Sect. 9). The above axiom demands the invariance of the equations of motion 
under such orthogonal transformations, provided they be proper (no reflections 
included). In variance under translation implies the homogeneity of space and 
invariance under rotation implies isotropy. In variance under reflection in a plane 
(improper transformation) would imply equivalence of the two screw-senses. 
To explore the most general type of force system satisfying the axiom, we 
note that the transformation considered corresponds precisely to a rigid-body 
displacement. Thus the axiom is satisfied if the force system is" rigidly attached" 
to the instantaneous configuration of the particles. To see what this means, consider a system of four particles as in Fig.1. The positions at timet are A, B, C, D, 
and the velocities are the four vectors marked v. We have to assign the four 
vectors marked F, the forces on the particles. The axiom demands that these 
forces can be described in terms of the tetrahedron A BCD and the four vectors v, 
rigidly attached to the tetrahedron, in such a way that if these defining elements 
are moved rigidly together in space, the forces F are carried rigidly along with 
them. The idea is extremely simple, concepts of elementary Euclidean geometry 
replacing the formal equations. If we abandon NEWTON's Third Law, but accept 
l Quoted in a footnote to Sect. 26. 
10 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 5 
the axiom of homogeneity and isotropy, then any force system so constructed 
is permissible. If we demand invariance under reflections also, then a reflection 
of the defining elements in a plane must reflect the forces in that plane. 
NEWTON's Third Law is consistent with the axiom of homogeneity and isotropy, but it restricts the interactions to the lines joining the particles, and thus 
fails to cope with electrodynamic interactions other than simple CoULOMB attractions and repulsions. However, electrodynamic interactions should be treated 
relativistically, and, in the systematic development of Newtonian dynamics, we 
shall accept NEWTON's Third Law, since otherwise we could not establish the 
fundamental principles of linear and angular momentum (cf. Sect. 44). 
Fig. 2. Interaction in relativistic 
dynamics. 
We now pass to the relativistic dynamics (RD) of 
a system. The requirement that the separation between adjacent events should have the form (4.2) 
limits the class of permissible coordinates (x, y, z, t) 
to those obtained from one such set by a LoRENTZ 
transformation (cf. Sect. 106). Just as in ND we 
imposed an axiom of homogeneity and isotropy of 
space, so in RD we impose a similar axiom in 
space-time. 
For a closed or isolated system of P particles, the 
Axiom of homogeneity and isotropy of space-time is as 
follows: The equations determining the motion of the 
system must be invariant under a proper1 LoRENTZ 
transformation. 
A LORENTZ transf<,>rmation may be regarded as a 
translation and rotation of space-time, a rigid-body 
transformation with "rigidity" understood in terms 
of separation (4.2). Therefore, just as permissible 
Newtonian force systems can be discussed in terms of 
rigid constructions in space, so permissible relativistic 
force systems can be discussed in terms of rigid constructions in space-time. 
But there the analogy between ND and RD ends. In ND we have, at any (absolute) time t, a configuration of particles with attached velocity vectors as in 
Fig. 1, but in RD we have only a set of world lines, and there is no obvious 
way to set up a unique correspondence between the events on the several world 
lines To correlate events with the same value of t would not be a LORENTZinvariant procedure. 
The most natural way to correlate events on the world lines is by means of 
null lines. Consider a system composed of two particles with constant proper 
masses m1 , m2 • Let J.Ji, JVa be their world lines (Fig. 2). It is convenient to use 
Minkowskian coordinates x. (small Latin suffixes take the values 1, 2, 3, 4 with 
summation understood for a repeated suffix), writing 
(5.8) 
where i= V-1. Let A, with coordinates x,, be an event on J.Ji. Draw the null 
cone 2 into the past from A as vertex; let it cut JVa at B, with coordinates x;, 
so that BA is a null line, and we have 
(x,- x;) (x,- x;) = 0. (5.9) 
1 A LORENTZ transformation is a linear transformation with determinant + 1 or - 1. 
In the former case, it is proper; in the latter case, improper (cf. Sect. 106). 2 Cf. Sect. 107. 
Sect. 5. Newtonian and relativistic dynamics of a system. 11 
Let 1 
A dx, t A A'=~_! atE (5.10) r = ds a ' r ds ' 
where ds, dsl are elements of proper time on Jli, ~respectively. 
The pair of world lines and the events A, B on them provide us with the 
following vectors: d ;., d ;.; 
x, - x; , A,, A; , -ris , H, .. .. (5 .11) 
Equations of the form 
(5 .12) 
for Jli, together with similar equations for ~, will constitute a suitable formulation of the two-body problem in RD, provided that X, is a vector constructed out of the vectors (5 .11) and invariants formed out of them. Thus we 
might take, as a fairly simple choice, satisfying this requirement, 
X ( I) R , , I + jl d).. d).~ r = IX X, - X, + p Ar + Y Ar U ds + e (IS' 1 
where the coefficients are assigned functions of the invariants 
W = (xn- x~) An, 
W ( 1) d).n = x,.-xn dS' 
W 1 = (x~- xn) A~, AnA~, ) 
- Xn Xn ds~-
d ).I 
An ds~' 
W'- ( I - ) d).~ J 
~' d).n d).n d).~ 
"n ds ' dS ds 1 • 
(5 .13) 
(5.14) 
In writing down the equations for~. we use events C, D as in Fig. 2 instead 
of A, B and make appropriate changes. 
The preservation of the mass m1 imposes the condition [d. (4.11)] 
X,A,= o, 
or ex w - p + y A, A; + d, ~:; = o; 
the preservation of m2 imposes a similar condition. 
(5.15) 
(5 .16) 
Although the equations as in (5 .12) satisfy the condition of LoRENT-z-invariance, they present a mathematical problem far more complicated than what 
we meet in ND. They appear to be differential equations, but they involve the 
two events A, B, and have the nature of difference equations on account of the 
"retarded" effects due to B. 
The commonly accepted equations of motion for a pair of particles carrying 
electric charges e1 , e2 are as in (5.12); the coefficients in (5.13) are given by1 
(5 .17) 
4 2 - el e2 !!!_ nc e- w12 , 
the other coefficients being zero. 
1 The charges are measured in HEAVISIDE rational units; to change to Gaussian electrostatic units, delete the factor 4n. The factor c is the speed of light. For the derivation of 
these formulae, see W. PAULI, Relativitatstheorie, Encykl. d. Math. Wiss. V 19, p. 645. 
Leipzig und Berlin: Teubner 1920, where, however, there is a misprint in the last line-for 
(X,u') 3 read (X,u') 2. Cf. al~o J. L. SYNGE: Relativity: The Special Theory, pp. 394, 423. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland 1956. 
12 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 6. 
To summarize, for a single particle in a given field of force, we have a set 
of three differential equations to solve, whether the dynamics be Newtonian or 
relativistic. But, for a system of interacting particles, the differential equations 
of Newtonian dynamics are replaced in relativity by differential-difference 
equations; these present such great mathematical difficulties that only certain 
limiting cases can be handled by approximate methods 1. 
B. Kinematics. 
I. Displacements of rigid bodies. 
6. Displacements parallel to a plane. The position of a rigid body is determined 
by the position of any plane section of it, and so the displacements of a rigid 
body which are parallel to a fixed plane may be discussed in terms of the displacements of a lamina in a plane. Such a displacement may be described by 
stating that two points of the lamina, initially at A and B, are moved to positions A' and B'. This displacement may be broken down into a sequence of two 
displacements: (i) a translation carrying A to A', and (ii) a rotation about A'. 
Or we may start with a rotation and follow it by a translation. 
It is convenient to use complex numbers (z = x + i y) to describe displacements in a plane. A translation, represented by a complex number t, causes a 
transformation z' =z+t. For a rotation through an angle{) about a point c, 
we have z'- c = (z - c) eiif. 
If we use T and R as symbols for the operations of translation and rotation 
respectively, and denote by R T and T R (read from right to left) the combined 
operations, then we have the following transformations for the two orders of 
the operations: R T: z' = c + (z + t- c) eiD, } 
T R: z' = t + c + (z - c) eiD. (6.1) 
In general these transformations are different (R T =1= T R), and this is perhaps 
the simplest example of two operations in mechanics which do not commute. 
We have RT= TR only in the exceptional cases where t=O or {)=O. 
Consider the first of (6.1). To find a fixed point for the displacement R T, 
we are to put z' =z; this gives for z the equation 
z (1 - eiD) = c + (t- c) eiD. (6.2) 
Unless{)= 0 (or a multiple of 2n) this equation has a unique solution. Therefore 
every rigid plane displacement (except a pure translation) has a unique fixed point. 
Equivalently, any rigid plane displacement (except a translation) can be produced by a rotation about a suitably chosen centre. 
This centre can be found (and indeed the above theorem proved) by means 
of a simple construction. Let the displacement send A to B and B to C. Then 
unless the displacement is a pure translation, the right bisectors of A B and B C 
meet at some point D; D is the required centre. 
The resultant of two plane displacements {D2D1) is therefore the resultant 
of two rotations {R2R1), and this resultant is itself a rotation (R3); we may write 
(6.3) 
1 Cf. C. G. DARWIN: Phil. Mag. (6) 39, 537 (1920). - J. L. SYNGE: Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond., Ser. A 177, 118 (1940). 
Sect. 7. EuLER's theorem. 13 
Two rotations about different centres do not commute (R2R1 -{=-R1R2). It 
is easy to construct the two resultants. Let A1 , A 2 be the centres and {)1 , {)2 
the angles of rotation. Then the angles of R2R1 and R1R2 are the same, viz. 
2cp=ff1 +ff2 , and their centres are C21 and C12 as in Fig. 3; these centres are 
reflections of one another in the line A1 A 2 • 
A lamina moving in a plane (or a rigid body moving parallel to a plane) has 
three degrees of freedom, since the position of the lamina is fixed when we know 
the two coordinates of any point of it and the inclination to a fixed direction 
of any line in it. Thus the configuration-space is of three dimensions (Sect. 62). 
It has the same type of connectivity as an infinite cylinder, there being one 
independent irreducible circuit, corresponding to a complete rotation of the 
lamina (Sect. 63); and it 
is flat with respect to the 
kinematical line element 
(Sect. 84). 
7. EuLER's theorem. Consider a rigid body with a l?t ( 
fixed point 0. Draw a 4~ '7----t--------+----4> 4 spherical surface S with 
unit radius and centre 0. 
The position of the body 
is fixed by the positions of 
those points of it which lie 
on S, and any displacement 
of the body which leaves 0 
fixed is a rigid transformation of S into itself. 
Fig. 3. Resultant of two rotations in a plane. C12 is the centre for R1 R2 and 
C21 the centre for R2 R1 • 
EULER's theorem: Any rigid displacement of a spherical surface into itself 
leaves two points of the surface fixed, these points being diametrically opposed to 
one another. 
This theorem can be proved (and the fixed points found) by the construction 
given after (6.2), the straight right bisectors in the plane being replaced by great 
circles on the sphere. The exceptional case (pure translation in the plane) cannot arise in the case of a sphere, for two great circles must intersect!. 
EuLER's theorem may be expressed by saying that a rotation about a point 
is a rotation about some line through that point. This property (fixed point 
implies fixed line) is due to the oddness of the dimensionality of space. 
The composition of two rotations about a point can be effected as in Fig. 3, 
with the straight lines replaced by great circles on the sphere. The points A1 
and A2 are now points where the sphere is cut by the two axes of rotation with 
A1 on one axis and A 2 on the other. The only essential difference is that although 
the angle of the resultant rotation is still 2 cp, where cp is the angle so marked 
in Fig. 3, we now have (7.1) 
E being the spherical excess of the triangle A1A2C12 . 
It is clear that finite rotations about a point do not commute (R2R1 -{=-R1R2), 
unless they are about a common line 2• 
:For a proof of EuLER's theorem based on the fact that a real orthogonal matrix has 
one eigenvalue equal to ± 1, see GoLDSTEIN [7], pp. 118-123. 
2 For a number of interesting special results on finite rotations and fuller demonstrations 
of the matters dealt with here, see LAMB [14], Chap. I. 
14 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 8. 
A rotation is specified by three parameters, e.g. the angle of the rotation 
and two of the direction cosines of its axis. Therefore a rigid body with a fixed 
point has three degrees of freedom, the same number as for a lamina moving in 
a plane. But in spite of the analogies between these two systems, there is a great 
algebraic difference. In the plane case we can use complex numbers very simply 
as in (6.1), but much more complicated methods are required to deal with finite 
rotations about a point, as will be seen in the following sections. The configuration-space (Sect. 62) has three dimensions in both cases and its connectivity 
is similar (one independent irreducible circuit, Sect. 63); but, whereas the configuration-space of a lamina is flat with respect to the kinematical line element 
(Sect. 84), that of a body with a fixed point is curved. 
8. General rigid body displacements. Let D denote any displacement ·of a 
rigid body. Suppose that D carries a point of the body from a position A to a 
position A'. Then D can be accomplished in two steps: (i) a translation A A', and 
(ii) a rotation about A'. This is the standard way of describing a general displacement, the point A of the body being called the base-point. 
A set of orthogonal triads originally parallel to one another is changed by D 
into a set of orthogonal triads parallel to one another. Hence it is clear that the 
rotation (i.e. the direction of its axis and the angle of rotation) is independent 
of the choice of base-point. But the translation depends on the choice of base 
point. 
CHASLES' theorem: Any rigid body displacement is equivalent to a screw. 
A screw is defined as the resultant of a rotation and a translation parallel 
to the axis of rotation; it is easy to see that for a screw the translation and the 
rotation commute. To prove CHASLES' theorem, we start with any base-point 
and break down the translation into two translations, one (say ~) parallel to 
the axis of rotation and the other (say T2) perpendicular to that axis. Then T2 
and the rotation are plane displacements with a common plane, and may be 
compounded into a single rotation with a new axis parallel to the old one (cf. 
Sect. 6). This rotation and ~ together form a screw. This proves CHASLES' 
theorem. 
A general rigid body displacement can be reproduced by two half-turns, 
a half-turn being a rotation about a line through two right angles (equivalently, reflection in a line). The axes of the two half-turns cut perpendicularly the axis of the equivalent screw; their distance apart is half the 
translation of the screw; and the angle between them is half the angle of 
rotation of the screw1 . 
A free rigid body has six degrees of freedom, three for the translation and 
three for the rotation. Its 6-dimensional configuration-space has one independent 
irreducible circuit, and is curved with respect to the kinematical line element 
(Sect. 84). 
We have observed the analogy between a plane displacement (translation + 
rotation) and a displacement of a 3-dimensional rigid body with a fixed point 
(rotation). There is a similar analogy between the general displacement of a 
rigid body (translation + rotation) and a displacement of a 4-dimensional rigid 
body with a fixed point (rotation). We do not meet 4-dimensional rigid bodies 
in Newtonian physics, but, in the special theory of relativity, LoRENTZ transformations with fixed origin [put B, = 0 in (107.5)] may be regard as 4-dimensional 
rotations, modified on account of the indefinite metric of space-time. 
1 For further details and other properties of finite displacements, see LAMB [14], Chap. I. 
Sect. 9. Orthogonal matrices. 15 
9. Orthogonal matrices. The following notation wiU be used for matrices: 
M is the transpose of M. 
Mt is the complex conjugate of M. 
1 is the unit matrix. 
M is orthogonal if MM = 1 (equivalently, M-1 = 1lf), and proper or improper 
according as det M = 1 or - 1. 
M is unitary if MMt = 1 (equivalently, M-1 =Mt). 
M is symmetric if M = M. 
M is Hermitian if Mt = M. 
r is the column matrix (x, y, z). 
Let (I, J, K) be an orthogonal triad of unit vectors (orthonormal triad) with 
origin at 0. Let a rigid body be given a rotation about 0, and, as a result, let 
(I, J, K), regarded as fixed in the body, be carried into the orthonormal triad 
(i,j, k). There exists, then, a matrix of scalar products (or relative direction 
cosines): 
M = (;:: ; :~ ; ::) . (9.1) 
K·i K-j K-k 
Using orthogonal projections and introducing the column matrices of vectors 
(9.2) 
we may exhibit the connection between the two triads in the following forms: 
(9-3) 
Let i have direction cosines (l1, m1, n1) relative to (I, J, K), with a similar 
notation for j and k. Then 
( 
l1 l 2 l3 ) 
M= m1 m2 m3 , 
n1 n2 na 
(9.4) 
From the orthonormality of the triads we have six conditions, of which the first 
two are [2 [2 [2 l l l ( ) 1+ 2+ a=1, 1m1+ 2m2+ ama=O, 9.5 
and it follows that M is an orthogonal matrix: 
(9.6) 
Hence det M = ± 1. If the triad is not moved at all, we have M =1, det M =1; 
therefore, by continuity, M is proper for all rotations. An improper orthogonal 
matrix corresponds to a rotation combined with a reflection in the origin. We 
shall confine the argument to rotations, although some of the formulae are applicable to improper orthogonal transformations. 
So far we have avoided the use of coordinates. But now let OXY Z be axes 
fixed in space, and let (I, J, K) coincide with them, so that/= ( 1, 0, 0), J = (0, 1, 0), 
K= (0, 0, 1). Consider any point of the body. Let its coordinates be (x, y, z) 
before the rotation and (x', y', z') after it. Then the initial and final position 
16 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
vectors of the point are respectively 
r=xi+yJ+zK,} 
r'=xi+yj +zk, 
so that 
x' = r' · I= l1 x + l 2 y + l3 z, etc. , 
and the coordinate transformation may be expressed in the matrix forms 
r'=Mr, 
Sect.<). 
(9.7) 
(9.8) 
(9.9) 
the second following from the first by (9.6). Note the linearity of the transformation, a most important fact. Further, note the formal interchange of M 
and Min the comparison of (9.3) and (9.9). 
For a given rotation, the matrix M depends on the choice of the triad (I, J, K), 
or, equivalently, on the choice of the axes OXY Z. By choosing K along the 
axis of rotation, we can simplify M to the form 
(
cosx -sinx 
M= sinx cosx 
0 0 
where X is the angle of the rotation. 
(9.10) 
When we compound a sequence of rotations, we do not, as a rule, keep the 
axes OXYZ fixed once for all. We may follow the scheme 
T--o-~--->- T2 --• · ·---Tn 1 ---+ t, (9.11) M, M, M, Mn-1 - Mn 
which shows, under each passage from triad to triad, the corresponding matrix 
as in (9.1) or (9.4). The resultant rotation is then, as in (9.3), 
(9.12) 
To get the corresponding coordinate transformation, using fixed axes coincident 
with T, we must, as in the transition from (9.3) to (9.9), replace M by its transpose, obtaining r'=Mr, (9.13) 
Note that the matrices are written down here in their natural order, so that the 
operations are actually applied in the reverse of that order. 
The difference between (9.12) and (9.13) (interchange of M and M) can be 
a source of such petty confusion. And there is yet a third way of looking at the 
rotation. We may hold a point fixed in space, and consider its coordinates (x, y, z) 
relative to the old triad T and its coordinates (x', y', z') relative to the new triad t. 
Then the transformation is r'=Mr, (9.14) 
which is similar to (9.12). 
To clarify the situation at this stage, we may sum up by saying that a proper 
orthogonal 3 X 3 matrix M can be interpreted in the following four consistent 
ways: 
(i) A table of scalar products (9.1) of the old triad (I, J, K) and the new 
triad (i,j, k). 
(ii) Rotation of an orthonormal triad, T~t with f=MT. 
(iii) Coordinate transformation with the axes fixed in space and the point 
carried with the body, r~r' with r' =Mr. 
(iv) Coordinate transformation with the point fixed in space and the axes 
carried with the body, r~r' with r' =Mr. 
Sect. 10. Rotation in terms o£ its axis and angle (Eulerian parameters). 17 
10. Rotation in terms of its axis and angle (Eulerian parameters). An ordered 
orthogonal triad of vectors (I, J, K) has two possible orientations, right-handed 
and left-handed. At a point on the earth's surface, we get a right-handed triad 
by taking I horizontal and pointing to the East, J horizontal and pointing to 
the North, and K directed vertically upward. In this article, all triads, including 
triads of coordinate axes, will be chosen right-handed, in accordance with current 
practice, unless specially noted otherwise. 
The positive sense of rotation about K is the sense of the 90°-rotation which 
carries I into J. 
Any rotation about an axis lying on a unit vector U can be described by a 
symbol [U, x], where x is an angle of rotation, counted positive in the positive 
sense just defined. The correspondence between rotations V 
and such representations is, however, multiple valued. 
For, if R denotes any rotation about U, we may write 
symbolically 
R = [ U, X + 2 n :n:] = [- U, - X + 2 n :n:] ( 10.1) 
n being any integer. 
We reduce the multiplicity of the correspondence by 
introducing a vector V and a scalar e as follows: 
V=Usinix. e=costx. (10.2) 
Let the components of V on any axes be (A, p,, v); then 
(10.2) imply 
(10.3) 
It is easy to see that any set of values (A, p,, v, e) satisfying (10.3) determine a unique rotation, but that to a 
given rotation there correspond two sets of values of 
these quantities. We may write symbolically o 
p 
R ={A, p,, v, e} ={-A,- p,,- v,- e}. (10.4) Fig. 4. Axis . V and angle of 
rotation X· 
The quantities (A, p,, v, e) are EULER's parameters1. They serve to describe 
the configurations of a rigid body with a fixed point. For we can pass from ·any 
given initial configuration C0 to a final configuration C by a definite rotation R, 
and R is determined by (A, p,, v, e). In view of (10.3) and (10.4), we may make 
the following statements, if we regard (A, ft, V, e) as rectangular Cartesian 
coordinates of a point in Euclidean 4-space: 
(i) Any point on the hypersphere (10.3) determines a final configuration 
of the body. 
(ii) Any final configuration of the body determines a pair of diametrically 
opposed points on the hypersphere ( 10.3). 
(iii) There is a continuous 1 : 1 correspondence between the final configurations of the body and the straight lines drawn through the origin in a space of 
four dimensions. 
Since (A, p,, v, e) describe a rotation about a fixed point, the matrix M of 
Sect. 9 is expressible in terms of them: this is done as follows. 
Let P(r) and P'(r') (Fig. 4) be the initial and final positions of a point of a 
body which experiences the rotation ( 1 0.2). Let N be the common foot of the 
1 The notation follows F. D. MuRNAGHAN: The Theory of Group Representations, p. 328. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press 1938. - WHITTAKER [28], p. 8, uses (~. TJ. C. z). 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 2 
18 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect 11. 
perpendiculars dropped from P and P' on V; let NP - = p, and let s be a unit 
vector such that (p, s, V) form a righthanded orthogonal triad. Then 
But 
--~ ------)- ~ 
r' = 0 N + N P' = 0 N + p cos X + s p sin X. 
p=r-ON, - and so by ( 1 0.2) 
Now 
r' = r cos X+ ON (1-~ x) + sinx (Vxr)fV l = r(e2 - V2) + 2 V20N + 2e(Vxr). 
V20N=V(V·r), - and so the transformation r-+r' is 
r' = r(e2 - V2) + 2V(V. r) + 2e(Vxr), 
or in matrix form r' = Mr, where 
(
A.2-,u2-v2+e2 2(A.,u-ve) 2(vA.+,ue)) 
M= 2(A.,u+ve) ,u2-v2-A.2+e2 2(,uv-A.e) , 
2(vA.-,ue) 2(,uv+A.e) v2-A.2-,u2+e2 
A., fl, v being the components of V, so that 
( 1 0.5) 
(1 0.6) 
(10.7) 
( 10.8) 
(10.9) 
(10.10) 
Note that M is unchanged if we replace (A., ,u, v, e) by (-A., - ,u, - v, -e), as 
of course must be the case. 
11. Eulerian angles 1• Let a rotation about 0 carry the orthonormal triad 
(I, J, K) into (i,j, k). We break this rotation into three rotations (Fig. 5). First, 
rotate about K so as to make the new position of the plane (I, K) contain k, 
say through an angle ([!; this gives a transformation l I 1 = I cos ([! + J sin ([!, ) 
(I, J, K) -+ (I1 , J 1 , K1) ~ = - I sin ([! + J cos ([!, 
K1 =K. 
(11.1) 
Secondly, rotate about J 1 to bring K1 to k, say through an angle{}; this gives a 
transformation l I 2 = I 1 cos{} - K1 sin{}, ) 
(Il, Jl, K1)-+ (I2, J2, k) J2 =J1, 
k = I 1 sin {} + K1 cos {}. 
(11.2) 
1 The notation used here follows WHITTAKER [28], p. 9, and has the advantage that (D, q;) 
are the usual polar angles of the vector k. For alternative notations, cf. H. TIETZ, this Encyclopedia, Vol. II, p. 135; APPELL [2] II, p. 151 (he interchanges rp and 1p); GOLDSTEIN [7], 
p. 107 (he discusses various usages). 
Sect. 11. Eulerian angles. 19 
Finally, rotate about k to bring I 2 to i and J 2 toj, say through an angle tp; this 
gives the transformation ~ i = I 2 cos "P + J 2 sin "P,) 
(I2, J 2, k)- (i,j, k) j = -I2 sin tp + J 2 costp, {11.3) 
k=k. 
The angles ({}, q;, tp) are the Eulerian angles. Their values determine the position 
of the triad (i,j, k) relative to (I, J, K). They may be given any values whatever, 
but all positions of (i,j, k) are obtained by letting them cover the following 
ranges: 
0 :;;;. {} :;;;:. 17:, ) 
0:;;;. q; < 21t, 
Os;;tp<21t. 
( 11.4) 
From the above equations of 
transformation we can express 
(i,j, k) as linear functions of 
(I, J, K), and hence obtain a 
matrix M of scalar products as I~---+--..,.-~kj 
in (9.1) or direction cosines as 
in (9.4). This matrix M is exhibited compactly as follows in 
an abridged notation in which 
c =cos, s =sin, and the subscripts 1, 2, 3 refer to {}, q;, tp Fig. s. Eulerian angles 8, <p, tp, 
respectively: i j k 
I cl c2 Ca- s2 sa - cl c2 sa- s2 Ca sl c2 
J cl s2 Ca + c2 Sa - cl s2 sa + c2 Ca sl s2 (11.5) 
K -sl Ca sl sa cl 
We have here an illustration of the composition of rotations according to 
(9.13), for we can pick out the matrices M1 , M2, Ma by transposing the elements 
in (11.1) to (11.3), and verify directly that the matrix M of {11.5) is 
M=M1 M2M3=(:: -;: ~) ( ~ ~ ~) (:: -;: ~)· (11.6) 
0 0 1 - s1 0 c1 0 0 1 
On comparing the matrix (11.5) with (10.9), it is easy to obtain the Eulerian 
parameters in terms of the Eulerian angles: 
;. = e sin i {}sin -l (tp - q;).] 
p = e sin i {}cos -l (tp - q;), (11.7) 
'II = e cos i {} sin i (tp + q;), 
(! = e cos i {}cos i (tp + q;). 
where e = ± 1; for definiteness, we may take e = 1, thus determining (.A, p, 'II, e) 
uniquely in terms of ({}, q;, tp). 
2* 
20 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
12. Quaternions. A quaternion q is of the form 
q=ai+bf+ck+d. 
Sect. 12. 
(12.1) 
where a, b, c, d are ordinary numbers (we shall take them real) and i, f, k are 
the quaternionic units!, or unit vectors, satisfying the algebraic rules 
i2 = f2 = k2 = - 1 • } 
fk=-kf=i, ki=-ik=f, if=-ii=k. (12.2) 
The vector part V q, the scalar part S q, the conjugate K q, the norm N q, and the 
reciprocal q-1 are defined as follows 2 : 
K q = - V q + S q, N q = ( q K q)i = (a2 + b2 + c2 + d2)l, (12.3) 
V q =a i + bf + c k, S q = d, q = V q + S q, l -1-~ q - (Nq)2. 
The vector part V q may be regarded as an ordinary vector, i, f, k being 
unit vectors on the coordinate axes. If S q = 0, q degenerates into a vector, with 
N q = 1 if it is a unit vector. 
Any quaternion q defines a positive number h, a unit vector p, and an angle 
X (0;:;:;: X< 2:n;) by the formula 
Then Nq=h, and 
q = h (cos i X + p sin i x) . 
q-1 = h-1 (cos i X- p sin i x). 
Let r be any vector and q any quaternion. Then the formula 
r' = qrq-1 
(12.4) 
(12.5) 
(12.6) 
defines a transformation r-r' such that S r' = S r = 0 (so that r' is a vector), 
and this transformation is in fact a rotation about the directed axis p through 
an angle x. where p and X are defined by (12.4). This may be shown as follows 3• 
It is clear that h(=Nq) cancels in (12.6), and we may take Nq=1, writing 
q = A.i + fl i + 'JI k + (!, .A,2 + p,2 + 'J/2 + (!2 = 1. 
Then 
q-1 = - A. i - p, i - v k + e, 
and working out ( 12.6) with 
r = xi + y i + z k, r' = x' i + y' i + z' k, 
we find, in matrix notation, 
f'' = Mf' 
(12.7) 
(12.8) 
(12.9) 
where M has precisely the form (10.9). It follows that (12.6) defines a rotation 
and that the numbers (.A., p,, v, e). introduced in (12.7), are in fact the Eulerian 
1 Following traditional practice, ordinary type is used here for quaternions. 1 See L. BRAND: Vector and Tensor Analysis (New York: Wiley 1947), Chap. X for a 
compact account of quaternions. BRAND defines the norm as qKq. C. ]. JoLY, A Manual 
of Quaternions (London: Macmillan 1905), p. 12, writes q K q = ( T q) 2, and calls Tq the tensor 
of q; but it seems advisable to avoid the historic word tensor, on account of its common 
use nowadays in a different sense in tensor calculus. 3 For other proofs, see BRAND, op. cit., p. 417, and JoLY, op. cit., p. 18. 
Sect. 13. Stereographic projection and CAYLEY-KLEIN parameters. 21 
parameters (Sect. 10) of that rotation. Further, putting h=1 in (12.4), we have 
V q = p sin t x, (NV q) 2 = }.2 + p 2 + v2 = sin2 t X,} (12.10) 
s q = e = cos t x, 
so that [cf. (10.2)] Vq is the vector V of Sect.10 (directed axis of rotation), 
and the angle X of the quaternion, as defined by (12.4), is the angle of the rotation. 
13. Stereographic projection! and CAYLEY-KLEIN parameters. Project the 
sphere x2 + y2 + z2 = 1 from the point (0, 0, 1) on the plane z = 0 (stereographic 
projection); let (X, Y) be the 
projection of (x, y, z) (Fig. 6). 
Then, as is easy to see, 
y 
y 
1-z 
--
X 
X=-~, 1-z 
Y-__Y_. - 1-z' 
1 
2X 
X= X2+Y2+ 1, (13.1) 
2¥ 
y= X 2+Y2+1' 
X2+Y2-1 
Z= X2+Y2+1' 
2 
1-Z= X2+Y2+1 
A simple calculation gives 
z 
Fig. 6. Stcreographic projection. 
dx2 + d 2 + dz2 = ~(dX2 + d¥2) = __.!_~ dZ (13.2) 
y (X2 + Y2 + 1)2 (Z Z + 1) 2 · 
where Z =X+ i Y and the bar indicates the complex conjugate. 
Any transformation Z --+Z' induces a transformation (x. y, z)--+ (x', y', z') of 
the unit sphere into itself, and this will be a rigid transformation if it conserves 
dx2 + dy2 + dz2, i.e. if 
dZ' dit' 
(Z' Z' + 1) 2 
dZdZ -----
(Z Z + 1) 2 
It is easy to verify that this condition is satisfied by the transformation 
Z'- J..~ + q __ - -qZ+P' 
(13-3) 
(13.4) 
where p, q are any complex numbers (stereographic parameters) satisfying 
PP+q!J=1, 
so that they possess three degrees of freedom. 
Calculation gives 
Z'Z'+1 
(qZ -p) (qZ- p) 
ZZ+1 
1 Cf. H. TIETz: This Encyclopedia, Vol. II, p. 187. 
(13.5) 
( 13 .6) 
22 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 13. 
and hence, by (13.1), 
x' + i y' = z•l~: 1 = p2 (x + i y) - q2 (x-i y) - 2p q z, ) 
x'- iy' =P2(x- iy)- q2(x + iy)- 2pqz, (13.7) 
z' = ~:;: ~: = pq(x + iy) +P q(x- iy) + (pp- qq) z. 
Thus we have the transformation r' =MT, where the matrix M is 
( 
t(P2+p2-q2-q2) ii(p2-p2+qa-q-a) -pq-pq) 
M = t i(- p2 + p2_+ q2- q2) t (p2_+P2 +_q2 + q2) i(~ q- pq) . 
Pq+pq ~(pq-pq) pp- qq 
(13.8) 
The transformation r~r' appears primarily as a rigid displacement of the unit 
sphere into itself, but, since it is linear and homogeneous, it gives a rigid rotation 
of all space. 
Certain properties of the rotation are evident from ( 13 .4). Thus Z = - qfp 
gives Z' = 0, so that the corresponding point on the unit sphere goes to (0, 0, -1); 
also Z =f)/q gives Z' = oo, so that the corresponding point goes to (0, 0, 1). The 
axis of rotation is obtained by putting Z' =Z and solving the quadratic equation 
so obtained. 
By comparing the matrices (10.9) and (13.8), we connect the Eulerian parameters (A, p,, v, e) with the stereographic parameters (p, q) 1 ; and we link up 
with the Eulerian angles (D, rp, 1p) by (11.7), taking e = 1. There is of course an 
ambiguity of sign in the connection between the Eulerian parameters and the 
stereographic parameters, because the matrix ( 13 .8) is not changed if we reverse 
the signs of both p and q. Making a choice of sign, we obtain 
p = e + iv =cos tD eli('l'+'l'l, } 
q = iA- p, = -sin ifJeli(tp-tp). 
The CAYLEY-KLEIN parameters (or:, (3, y, 15) are defined by 2 
IX= p = e + iv =cos tD eli(tp+tp)' ) 
(3 =-iq =A+ ip, = i sin tD eli(tp-tp), 
y = - iq = - A+ ip, = i sin tD e-fi(tp-tp), 
t5 = p = e-iv =cos tD e-~i('l'+'l'l. 
By virtue of (13.5) they satisfy the unimodular condition 
I; ~l=or:d-(3y=1. 
and in terms of them the matrix (10.9) or (13.8) reads 
(13.9) 
(13.10) 
(13.11) 
( 
i(or:2 + (32 + y2 + d2) ii(or:2- (32 + y2- d2) 
M= ii(-or:2-(32+y2+<52) j-(or:2-(32-y2+d2) -or:(3+yd . (13.12) 
-i(or:f3+yd)) 
i(or:y+f3d) -or:y+f3d or:d+{Jy 
1 For relevant group theory, see MuRNAGHAN, p. 328 of op. cit. in Sect. 10. 2 The notation follows WHITTAKER [28], p. 12. 
Sect. 14. Spin matrices of PAULI. 23 
14. Spin matrices of PAuLI. The 2X2 spin matrices of PAULI and the unit 
matrix are defined as follows 1 : 
( 14.1) 
Note that the 6's are Hermitian (6t=6) and unitary (66t=1), and that the 
trace 2 of each is zero. 
The following multiplication table may be verified directly: 
6~ = 6~ = 6~ = 1 ' 
6 2 63 = - 63 6 2 = i 61 , 63 61 = - 61 63 = i 6 2, 
Comparison with ( 12.2) shows that the three matrices Te = - i 6e (e = 1, 2, 3) 
obey the quaternionic rules 3• 
Any 2 X 2 matrix can be expressed as a linear combination of 6 1 , 6 2 , 6 3 , and 1; 
for, no matter what values are given to a, b, c, d, we have 
(; !)=l(b+c)61 +li(b-c)62 +l(a-d)63 +l(a+d)1. (14.3) 
If the trace of the given matrix is zero (a+ d = 0), the last term disappears. If, 
further, the matrix is Hermitian (a, d real, c=b), then the coefficients of the 6's 
are real. 
The PAULI matrices are linked with three-dimensional geometry by the identity 
P=( +z. x-iy)=x61+Y62+z6a; .x zy - z ( 14.4) 
any point (x, y, z) defines such a matrix, and conversely every Hermitian 2 X 2 
rna trix with zero trace defines a point ( x, y, z) . 
Consider now any 2 X 2 matrix U which is unitary ( U Ut = Ut U = 1), but 
not in general Hermitian (Ut=j= U). With Pas in (14.4), the formula 
P' = UPUt (14.5) 
defines a 2 X 2 matrix P'. It is easy to show that P' is Hermitian, with zero trace, 
and therefore (14.5) gives a transformation (x,y,z)-+(x',y',z') of space into itself. 
Since U ut = 1, we have det U det Ut = 1, and hence det P' = det P; therefore 
x' 2 + y' 2 + z' 2 = x2 + y2 + z2, (14.6) 
so that the unit sphere is transformed into itself. Further, ( 14.5) gives dP' = U dP Ut, 
and hence, as above, 
dx' 2 + dy' 2 + dz' 2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 ; 
the transformation is a rigid rotation about the origin 4. 
( 14.7) 
1 The notation follows GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 116, and W. PAULI, this Encyclopedia, Vol. V, 
p. 109. MURNAGHAN (p. 296 of op. cit. in Sect. 10) and H. TIETZ (this Encyclopedia, Vol. II, 
p. 191) define the second matrix with the opposite sign. 
2 The trace (or spur) -of a matrix is the sum of the diagonal elements. 
3 In Sect. 12 HAMILTON's notation (i, j, k) is used for the quaternionic units, but when v-1 is involved in the ordinary sense, as in (14.1), confusion may be avoided by changing 
to (I,], K) or (e1 , e2 , e3). 
4 It will become clear in Sect. 15 that the transformation is proper. For a proof, see 
MuRNAGHAN (op. cit. in Sect. 10, p. 298), where the group theory connected with the PAULI 
matrices is discussed. 
24 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 15. 
Let X be real; write c =cos -!x, s =sin -!x. Then the three matrices 
U3 (x) = c 1 - is 6 3 ( 14.8) 
are easily seen to be unitary, by (14.2) . Consider the transformation 
P' = U3 (X) P U~ (x) = (c 1 - is 6 3) (x 6 1 + y 6 2 + z 6 3) (c 1 + is 6 3). ( 14.9) 
On working out the algebra, using (14.2), we find that it gives 
x' = x cos X - y sin X, y' = x sin X + y cos x, z' = z, (14.10) 
which is the transformation (relative to axes fixed in space) corresponding to 
a rotation through angle X about the z-axis. By the symmetry of (14.2) and 
(14.8), U1 (x) and U2 (x) give similar rotations about the x-axis and the y-axis 
respectively. 
15. Connections between the PAULI matrices and the other ways of representing rotations. Let us first connect the PAuLI matrices with the Eulerian angles. 
The three matrices in ( 11.6) correspond respectively to rotations as follows: 
r.p about the z-axis, {} about the new y-axis, and 1p about the new z-axis. These 
operations correspond to U3 (r.p), U2 ({}), U3 (1p) respectively, and so the transformation r' =Mr of (11.6) is the same as 
P'= TPTt, (15.1) 
where Pis as in (14.4) and1 
T = U3 (r.p) U2 (fJ) U3 ('1fJ) ) 
= (e- ~''~' 0 ) (cos j{} -sin j{}) (e-~i>p 0 ') I 
0 e'''~' sin j{} cos j{} 0 e~i>p 
=(cos j{} e- ~i('l'+'l'l -sin j{} e- ~i(tp->p)) 
sinj{}eAi(tp->p) cosi{}e!i(q;+>p) · J 
(15.2) 
In terms of the stereographic parameters, we have, by (13.9) 
T=( p q), -q p (15.3) 
and so the transformation ( 15.1) may be written 
( z' 
x' +iy' 
x' -, i y') = ( p q) ( z . x - i y) (P - ~,) ' 
z ,- q p x + zy z q p (15.4) 
PP+qq=1. 
The unitary character of T may be verified immediately. 
In terms of the Eulerian parameters, we have, by (13.9), 
= ( (! - iv - iA - fl). T . , . ' - z 11 + p, (! + zv 
(15.5) 
or 
( 15 .6) 
1 The matrix T differs from the corresponding matrix given by GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 116, 
which has a factor i in two elements. This is because our rotation ( 11.2) is about the y-axis, 
whereas in GoLDSTEIN's definition of the Eulerian angles his second rotation is abont the 
x-axis. As a result 111 appears in his work where 112 appears here. 
Sects. 16, 17. Frames of reference. Velocity of a particle. 25 
so that the transformation (15.4) may be written 
~'a +y'a +z'tJ = (-iA.tJ1 -if1-tJ2-iva3 +e1) X } 
x (xa1 + ya2+za3) (iA.a1 +ifta2+iva3 +e1), A.2+!-l2+v2+ e2=1. (15-7) 
This is equivalent to the quatemionic formula (12.6): 
x'i + y'i +z' k = (A.i +!-li +vk+ e) (xi+ Yi +zk) (- Ai -!-li -vk+ e),} ( 8) 
A.2+!-l2+v2+e2=1. 15. 
16. Infinitesimal displacements. An infinitesimal displacement of a rigid body 
is reducible to an infinitesimal translation and an infinitesimal rotation. On 
account of their infinitesimal character (all differentials of order higher than 
the first being neglected), the translation and the rotation commute. Indeed, 
any two infinitesimal displacements commute, and this makes the discussion of 
infinitesimal displacements comparatively simple. 
To discuss an infinitesimal rotation, we take the rotation-angle X in (10.2) 
to be infinitesimal, so that V = -!x and e = 1. Let X be an infinitesimal vector 
with magnitude z, lying on the directed axis of rotation. Then X= 2 V, and ( 1 0.8) 
gives, for the infinitesimal displacement resulting from the rotation x. 
1'1 -1'= xxr. ( 16.1) 
The vector character of this equation tells us that we can compound infinitesimal 
rotations by adding the corresponding vectors X according to the parallelogram 
law. 
In matrix form (16.1) reads 
r'-r=Mr, (16.2) 
where z1 , z2 , Xa are the components of X· The matrix is skew-symmetric; it is 
easy to prove directly that any orthogonal matrix which differs infinitesimally 
from the unit matrix, differs from it by a skew-symmetric matrix. 
II. Kinematics. 
17. Frames of reference. Velocity of a particle. Let S0 be absolute fixed 
space (cf. Sect. 4), and let S be any rigid body, fixed or moving. S constitutes 
a frame of reference; if 0 x y z are any rectangular axes fixed in S, then to any 
event there corresponds a tetrad of numbers (x, y, z, t), t being the absolute 
Newtonian time (cf. Sect. 4). Kinematics deals only with relative motions, and 
for kinematical purposes S is as good as S0 ; it is only in dynamics proper (i.e. 
when forces producing motion are considered) that the distinction between S 
and S0 appears. 
Let P be a moving point or particle. Its velocity relative to S is the vector 
. (. . ") V='f'= x,y,z, ( 17.1) 
the dot indicating ·differentiation with respect to t. The velocity is tangent to 
the trajectory of P and of magnitudes, where sis arc-length on the trajectory. 
The magnitude of the velocity is called speed. 
Let xe be curvilinear coordinates in S; then the line-element of S is of the 
form ds2 =gea dxl1 dxa, suffixes taking the values 1, 2, 3, with summation understood for a repeated suffix. The contravariant and covariant velocity vectors 
26 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 18 
are respectively VII= · · ( ) XII, V11 = g110 X 6 • 17.2 
The physical component of velocity in the direction of a unit vector with contravariant components All (and covariant components A11 ) is the orthogonal proj.ection of (17.1) on that direction, i.e. the invariant! 
v(A)=v11 AII=VIIA11 • (17.3) 
In cylindrical coordinates (r, f(J, z), the physical components of velocity along 
the coordinate lines are (r, r9-;, z). (17.4) 
In spherical polar coordinates (r, {}, f{J), the physical components of velocity are 
Fig. 7. (p, r) coordinates. 
(r, rD, r sin {}9-;). (17.5) 
In (p, r) coordinates in a plane (Fig. 7), 
the components v, along the radius vector 
and v .L perpendicular to it are 
p;. 
v,=r, V_L=- . (17.6) Vr2- p2 
18. Acceleration of a particle. Hodograph. 
The acceleration a of a point or particle is 
the rate of change of velocity: 
a= v = r = (x,y,z). (18.1) 
Resolution along i, the unit tangent vector to the trajectory, and j, the unit 
vector along its principal normal, gives 
• • v2 • d v • v2 • a=vt+-J=v-t+-J, e ds e (18.2) 
where v is the speed and e is the radius of curvature of the trajectory. 
For curvilinear coordinates xe with ds2 = g110 dx11 dx0 as in Sect. 17, the contravariant acceleration vector is 2 
all= XII+{:.} xPx•, 
where the CHRISTOFFEL symbol is defined by 
( 18.3) 
{ e} =gear .. 'JI a] 2r"'JI a]= ogpa + og.a- ogl'. ge"ga,=f5ae· (18.4) pv lP' ' ' lP' ' ox• oxl' ox0 ' r 
Here 6~ is the KRONECKER delta (=1 if (!=a, =0 if e=J=a). It is usually easier 
to calculate the covariant acceleration vector: 
a ar ar a=-~----
e dt oXe axe ' (18.5) 
The physical component 3 of acceleration in the direction of a unit vector All is 
(18.6) 
1 If the coordinates are orthogonal (g110=0 for e=t= 11), this definition is satisfactory. 
But when the coordinates are oblique, it is sometimes convenient to define physical components by i:>blique resolution, and care is needed to avoid confusion of ideas; cf. C. TRUESDELL: 
Z. angew. Math. Mech. 33, 345 (1953); 34, 69 (1954). 2 Cf. A. J. McCoNNELL: Applications of the Absolute Differential Calculus, Chap. 1 7. 
London and Glasgow: Blackie 1931; I. S. SoKOLNIKOFF: Tensor Analysis, Chap. 4. New 
York: Wiley 1951; J. L. SYNGE and A. ScHILD: Tensor Calculus, Chap. 5. Toronto: University of Toronto Press 1952. 3 See footnote in Sect. 17 with reference to oblique coordinates. 
Sect. 19. Angular velocity of a rigid body. 27 
For cylindrical coordinates (r, rp, z) we have 
d s2 = dr2 + r 2 d rp2 + d z2 , ( 18. 7) 
and the physical components of acceleration along the coordinate lines are 
a,= r- rcp2 , a = _!_ _!__ (r2m) 'P r dt r a,=z. ( 18.8) 
For spherical polar coordinates (r, {), rp) we have 
ds2 = dr2 + r2 d{)2 + r2 sin2 {) drp2 , (18.9) 
and the physical components of acceleration along the coordinate lines are1 
a,= r- r0.2 - r sin2 f)cp2 ' l 
a{}= : :t (r20.) - r sin{) cos{) g;2, (18.10) 
- 1 d ( 2 . 2{) ') a'P- rsin{} dt r sm rp · 
The curve with equation r' = v (t), where v (t) is the velocity of a moving 
point, is called the hodograph of the motion. For constant velocity, the hodograph is a single point; for constant acceleration, it is a straight line; for motion 
with a=;= krjr3 (inverse square law), it is a circle 2• 
19. Angular velocity of a rigid body. Let S0 be a rigid body relative to which 
a second rigid body S moves. For simplicity of description we may think of S0 
as fixed in absolute space. Having selected a particle P0 of S as base-point, 
we can describe any infinitesimal displacement of S by giving the displacement 
of P0 and the rotation about P0 • The latter is an infinitesimal vector x. as in 
(16.1). We define the angular velocity w of S by the equation 
x= wdt, ( 19.1) 
dt being the infinitesimal time-interval during which the displacement takes 
place. The velocity v of any particle P of S is then 
v =v0 + w X r, ( 19.2) 
where v 0 is the velocity of P0 and r the position vector of P relative to P0 • 
The vectors v 0 , wand r may be described by giving their components at the 
instant t along any orthonormal triad T, which may be fixed in 50 , or in S, 
or may be moving relative to both S and S0 • It is usually most convenient to 
fix Tin S, but in cases of symmetry it may be better to fix one vector of T in 
S and confine another to a plane fixed in S0 , as we shall see later (Sect. 56). 
Since v 0 is separated from w in ( 19.2), we can discuss the angular velocity of 
S as if P0 were fixed. To express w in terms of the Eulerian angles (Sect. 11), 
we may take T to be the triad (i,j, k) of Fig. 5, fixed in S. The displacement 
in time dt can be produced by infinitesimal rotations d{), drp, d1p about J 1 , K, k, 
respectively, and so 
wdt = ~d{) + Kdrp + kd1p. ( 19.3) 
1 These and other accelerations may also be calculated by means of moving axes; cf. 
WHITTAKER [28], p. 18, where a number of special coordinate systems are discussed. 
2 Cf. MAcMILLAN [17] I, p. 285. 
28 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
On resolving~' K, k along (i,j, k), we obtain 
w = w1 i + w2 j + w3 k, I w1 = {). sin tp - cp sin {} cos tp, 
w2 = {). cos tp + cp sin {} sin tp , 
W3 = ti; + cp cos {}. 
Similarly we can resolve on (I, J, K), fixed in S0 (Fig. 5), obtaining 
w = Q1J + Q2J + !l3K, 
!11 = -{J.sinrp+ti;sin{}cosrp, 
!12 ={).cos rp + ti; sin{} sin rp, 
Q3 = cp + tiJ cos{}. 
Sect. 19. 
( 19.4) 
( 19. 5) 
To discuss angular velocity in terms of quaternions and the Eulerian parameters, we let the quaternionic units (i, f, k) correspond to axes fixed in S0 • The 
position r of a particle at time t is given, as in (12.6), by 
r=qroq-1, 
where r 0 = x0 i + y0 1. + z0 k, the initial position of the particle, and 
From (19.6) we have 
We note that 
and that 
q=l.i+!-lf+vk+e, l 
q-1=-J..i-f-lf-vk+e, 
).2 + #2 + v2 + 122 = 1 . 
so that these products are vectors. 
If 
( 19.6) 
( 19.7) 
(19.8) 
(19.10) 
(19.11) 
is the angular velocity, resolved along the fixed axes, then, by (19.2) with v0 =0, 
; = f(!lr- r!l). (19.12) 
Comparing this with (19.8), we have 
ar- ra = 0, 
where 
(19.13) 
(19.14) 
Since a is a vector and ran arbitrary vector, (19.13) implies a=O, and therefore 
the angular velocity is 
(19.15) 
Sect. 20. Moving axes. Absolute and relative rates of change of a vector. 29 
evaluating this product by (19.9), we find the components of angular velocity, 
relative to the fixed axes (i, f, k): 
By (19.15} we have 
D1 = 2(~e- A(! -~iv + 1-li?, l 
D2 = 2(/J,e- 1-le -VA+ vA), 
!la = 2 (v e -vi!- il-l + A,U). 
q-1Qq = 2q-1q = w1 i + w2 f + w3 k, 
w1 , w2 , w3 being defined by this equation; hence 
Q = w1 qiq-1 + w2 qf q-1 + w3 qkq-1 , 
(19.16) 
(19.17) 
(19.18) 
and we recognize w1 , w2 , w3 as the components of angular velocity on that triad 
which initially coincided with (i, f, k). Carrying out the calculation in (19.17), 
we have the components of angular velocity on the moving axes1 : 
wl=2(~e-Ae+f1.v-f-tv), l 
w2 = 2 {it e - 1-l e + _v A - v ~) ' 
Wa= 2(ve- vi!+ Af-t- A/J,) 0 
(19.19) 
20. Moving axes. Absolute and relative rates of change of a vector. The 
theory of moving axes is often found difficult and confusing on account of the 
demands it makes on one's power to visualize bodies in motion. If one gets confused, the best plan is to think in terms of infinitesimal displacements, resolving 
the actual displacement which occurs in time dt into a set of elementary displacements, each due to a different cause. There is no question of the order in which 
these causes are applied, because infinitesimal displacements commute with one 
another. For brevity, such an analysis into infinitesimal causes is omitted in 
the derivation of the formulae which follow. 
Let (i,j, k) be an orthonormal triad, rotating with angular velocity w. Let V 
be a vector, with components (l';,, ~. Va) on the rotating triad, so that 
V= l';,i + ~j + "Vak. (20.1) 
The rates of change of the vectors (i,j, k) are the same whether the origin of 
the triad is fixed or moving; they are determined solely by the angular velocity ro. 
If the origin is fixed, these rates of change are the velocities of points with position 
vectors (i,j, k), and so, by (19.2) we have 
di • dt=WXt, dj • dk k 
dt = ro XJ, -(j( = ro X . 
Differentiating (20.1}, we see that the absolute rate of change 2 of Vis 
dV dV Iii-= Tt + w XV, 
where 
~ = ~1_ • + _cl__lJ_ • + ~1._ k. 
dt dt 1. dt J dt ' 
this is the relative rate of change of V. 
1 See WHITTAKER [28], p. 16, for an alternative derivation 2 WHITTAKER [28], p. 17, calls it the time-flux. 
(20.2} 
(20.3} 
(20.4} 
30 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 20. 
If, in particular, V = w, we have 
dw /Jw 
dt=dt' (20.5) 
the absolute and relative rates agreeing. 
For the absolute second derivative we have 
d2V IJ2V IJV /Jw ~=~+ 2WX M+dt X V+w X (w XV). (20.6) 
We shall apply these formulae to the calculation of velocity and acceleration. 
Let S0 be fixed absolutely. Let S be a rigid body in general motion, ~arrying 
an orthonormal triad (i,j, k), the origin 0 of this triad having a position vector 
T 0 (t) relative to some origin in S0 • Let P_ be any moving point or particle, not 
necessarily attached to S; its absolute position vector '1', relative to the origin 
in S0 , may be written 
'l'='l'o+'l'', 
where 
r' =xi+ yj + zk, 
- (20.7) 
(20.8) 
this last being in fact the vector OP; (x, y, z) are the coordinates of P as judged 
by an observer attached to S, which is, in fact, a moving frame of reference. 
By (20.3) the absolute velocity of P is 
df' df'0 + df'' + , , V=dt=dt dt=V0 V +wX'I', (20.9) 
where 
v 0 =absolute velocity of 0, 
v' = ~:' =relative velocity of P, as observed by an observer carried by S; 
its components are (%, y, z), 
w =angular velocity of S. 
If P is attached to S, then v' = 0; for this reason the remaining part (v0 + w X r') 
is called the velocity of transport. 
Differentiation of (20.9) gives the absolute acceleration of P in the form 
where 
a = a0 + a' + a,+ a,, 
a0 = dd~o = absolute acceleration of 0, 
/j2 , 
a'= IJ; =xi+ y j + z k = relative acceleration, 
a, = 2 w x v' = CoRIO LIS (or complementary) acceleration, 
a, = w x .,., + w X (w X '1'') = w X .,., + w (w · r') - r' w2 • 
Here w=dwfdt=!JwjM. 
If P is attached to S, then a' = ac = 0 and 
a= a0 + a1; 
this part of (20.10) is called the acceleration of transport. 
(20.10) 
(20.11) 
(20.12) 
(20.13) 
Sect. 21. Mass-centres Moments and products of inertia. 31 
If w is constant, then (20.14) 
where R is the vector drawn perpendicularly from the axis of w to P; this may 
be called centripetal acceleration. 
III. Mass distributions and force systems. 
21. Mass-centres. Moments and products of inertia. The mass-centre of a system 
of particles with masses m, and position vectors r; is the point 
2.: m;T; 
i r =-.,..,--. J:.,m; 
If the system is rigidly displaced, its mass-centre is carried rigidly with it. 
(21.1) 
In a uniform gravitational field, the gravitational forces acting on a system 
of particles are statically equivalent (or equipollent) to a single force acting at 
the mass-centre. For that reason, the mass-centre is commonly called the centre 
of gravity. The word barycentre is also used. In this article the term mass-centre 
will be used throughout. 
For a continuum of density e the mass-centre is defined as in (21.1), with 
summations replaced by integrations: 
r = f/:d~._ (21.2) 
This formula applies to distributions of mass over volumes, surfaces, or curves, 
d r being respectively an element of volume, surface, or length, and e being the 
appropriate density. 
If a system S consists of n parts 5; (i = 1, 2, ... , n) with masses m; and masscentres r,, then the mass-centre of S may be found by replacing each part 5; 
by a particle of mass m; at r,, and using the formula (21.1). 
The linear moment of a particle with respect to the origin is the vector mr, 
and its quadratic moment with respect to the axes of coordinates is the matrix or 
tensor 
(
mx2 
myx 
mzx 
mxy 
my2 
mzy 
mxz) 
myz . 
mz2 
(21. 3) 
The linear and quadratic moments of a system are given by summation or integration. 
Moments and products of inertia are closely connected with the quadratic 
mome:1t. The moment of inertia of a particle P of mass m about a line L is mp2, 
where p is the perpendicular distance of P from L. Its product of inertia with 
respect to a pair of perpendicular planes is mpq, where p, q are the distances 
of P from the planes, taken with appropriate signs. The moments and products 
of inertia of systems are found by summation or integration1. Thus, for a discrete system of particles, the moments of inertia with respect to the coordinate 
axes Oxyz are 
A = l: m; (Y7 + z~), B = ~ m, (z~ + x~) , } 
c = 2: m; (xi + y~), 
(21.4) 
1 If a system of total mass m has a moment of inertia I about a line L, then the radius 
of gyration k about L is defined by mk2 =I. 
)2 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 22. 
and the products of inertia with respect to the coordinate planes are 
F=L,m,y,z,, G=L,m;Z;X;, H=L,m,x,y,. (21.5) 
j i i 
If V = (l, m, n) is a unit vector through the origin, then the moment of inertia 
about V is, by the definition, 
I= 1:m,p: = 1:m,!T;XV! 2 ) 
i i 
= A l2 + B m2 + C n2- 2F m n - 2 G n l - 2H l m. 
(21.6) 
Since I is a quantity independent of the choice of directions of coordinate axes, 
the elements of the symmetric inertia matrix · 
( A -H -G) 1= -H B -F 
-G -F C 
(21.7) 
are the components of a tensor of the second order. 
For a continuous distribution 
A=fe(Y2+z2)d-r, 
F=feyzd-r, 
B=Je(z2+x2)d-r, 
G=fezxd-r, 
c = J e(x2+ y2) d-r,} (21.8) H=fexyd-r. 
22. Theorem of parallel axes. Principal axes of inertia. Let L be any line 
and L0 a parallel line through the mass-centre of a system. The theorem of parallel 
axes states that (22.1) 
where I, I 0 are the moments of inertia about L, L0 , respectively, m is the total 
mass of the system, and p the perpendicular distance between L and L0 • This is 
easy to prove, as is also a similar theorem for products of inertia. 
From (22.1) it follows that the moment of inertia about a line L0 passing 
through the mass-centre is less than that about any parallel line L. 
Principal axes are defined in terms of stationary values of the moment of 
inertia. To each unit vector V drawn through the origin (which may be any 
point) there corresponds a moment of inertia I, as in (21.6). The direction cosines 
(l, m, n) of a vector V for which I has a stationary value satisfy 
Al-Hm-Gn=Il,) 
-Hl+Bm-Fn=Im, 
-Gl-Fm+Cn=In, 
(22.2) 
where I is the stationary value. The three principal moments of inertia at the 
origin are these stationary values, which are the roots of the cubic determinantal 
equation A-I -H -G 
-H B-I -F =0. (22.)) 
-G -F C-I 
The three roots are real and positive: real because the matrix (21.7) is symmetric, 
and positive because the form (21.6) is positive-definite1. 
1 Except in the case when all the mass lies on a single line through the origin; then it 
is semi-positive-definite, and one root is zero, while the other two are equal and positive. 
Sect. 23. Linear momentum. 33 
The directions defined by (22.2), in which I has any one of the three values 
determined by (22.3), are the principal axes of inertia at the origin; these axes 
form an orthogonal triad 1, and the three planes determined by it are the principal planes. Products of inertia with respect to principal planes vanish, and for 
that reason (since it greatly simplifies the work) one uses, almost always, axes 
which coincide with the principal axes of inertia. Then the inertial properties 
are described by the three principal moments of inertia, A, B, C, and the moment 
of inertia about any line through the origin with direction cosines (l, m, n) is 
given by 
(22.4) 
For the geometrical representation of inertial properties one uses the momenta! 
ellipsoid 2 with equation 
A x2 + B y2 + C z2 - 2F y z - 2 G z x - 2 H x y = 1. (22. 5) 
The moment of inertia about any line L drawn through the origin is 1/r2, where r 
is the radius vector of this ellipsoid, drawn in the direction of L. 
Two mass distributions are equimomental if they have the same moment of 
inertia about any arbitrary line. It follows that two equimomental systems 
have the same mass-centre, the same total mass, the same principal axes of inertia 
at the mass-centre, and the same principal moments of inertia there. The converse 
is also true. 
A uniform triangular plate of mass m is equimomental to a set of three particles, each of mass m/3. placed at the middle points of the sides. A uniform solid 
tetrahedron of mass m is equimomental to a set of five particles, one of mass 
4m/5 placed at the mass-centre, and the other four, each of mass m/20, placed 
at the vertices3. 
23. Linear momentum. The linear momentum of a particle is mv, where m is 
the mass and v the velocity. The linear momentum M of a system is the sum 
of the linear momenta of its parts: 
M=Lmivi, M=fevd-r:. 
i 
(23.1) 
All the theory with which we are here concerned is applicable both to discrete 
systems of particles and to continuous systems, so that we have two types of 
formulae, one involving summation and the other integration. As the passage 
from the one to the other is obvious, only the summation will be shown in general. 
The velocity v, of any particle of a system may be written 
Vi=V +v;, (23.2) 
where v is the velocity of the mass-centre and v~ the velocity relative to the masscentre. By (21.1) we have 
(23-3) 
1 If two of the principal moments of inertia are equal, only one member of the triad is 
determined, and the triad may be completed by taking any orthogonal pair orthogonal to 
the determined member; this is the case of axial symmetry. If all three principal moments of 
inertia are equal, any orthogonal triad is principal; this is the case of spherical symmetry. 
2 For further details about the momental ellipsoid and the ellipsoid of gyration (the 
polar reciprocal of the momental ellipsoid with respect to its centre), and for the theory of 
moments of inertia generally, see RouTH [22] I, pp.16-22; see also AMES and MURNAGHAN [1], 
pp. 191-196, APPELL [2] II, pp. 1-17, and }UNG [12]. 
3 Cf. ROUTH [22] I, pp. 22-27. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 3 
34 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 24 
where r; is the position vector relative to the mass-centre; hence 
(23.4) 
and so, by (23.1) and (23.2), the linear momentum of the system is 
M=mv, (23.5) 
where m is the total mass of the system. The linear momentum of any system 
is the same as that of a single fictitious particle, with mass equal to the total 
mass of the system, moving with its mass-centre. 
24. Angular momentum. The angular momentum1 of a particle about a point 0 is 
h = rxM = rxmv = m (rxv), (24.1) 
where m is the mass, v the absolute velocity 2, and r the position vector relative to 
0. It is, in fact, the moment of the linear momentum. The three components read 
v 
0 Fig. 8. Angular momentum. 
h,. _ m(yv.- zv1), ) 
h1 - m(zv,.- xv.), 
h,=m(xv1 - yv,.). 
(24.2) 
The (scalar) angular momentum about a 
directed line through 0 is the orthogonal 
projection of h on that line. Thus, if V is a 
unit vector on the line, the scalar moment is 
v. (rxM) =1'· (Mx V) =M· (Vxr). (24.3) 
The angular momentum of a system is the sum of the angular momenta of 
its parts: 
h = L 1';Xm;V; = L m,(r,xv,). (24.4) 
i i 
The point 0 with respect to which angular momentum is calculated may 
be fixed or moving. To investigate the effect of changing from one such point 
to another, consider two points 0, 0* with absolute velocities v, v*, and let 
-
00* =1' (Fig. 8). Let there be any system of particles, a typical particle Po 
having position vectors r,, r; relative to 0, 0*, respectively, so that 
r, = r + r~. 
Then the angular momenta about 0, 0* respectively, are 
h = ~ m;r,xv,, 
i 
h* = ~ m,r;xv;, 
i 
(24.5) 
(24.6) 
1 The old term moment of momentum is obsolete. Following APPELL [2] II, p. 157. one 
might call it kinetic moment (moment cinetique). However, the term angular momentum is 
now standard in English practice. But it is hard to find a suitable symbol for it, avoiding 
all possible confusion with symbols having accepted meanings. Following WHITTAKER'S 
notation [28], p. 60, the symbol his used in this article; since quantum mechanics is excluded, 
there can be no confusion with PLANCK's constant h. But in other contexts, a different symbol 
is advisable. GOLDSTEIN [7], p. 379. uses L, in spite of the standard use of L for the Lagrangian 
function. APPELL (loc. cit.) and P:ERi:s [20], p. 14, use a. 2 We are still dealing with kinematics and the absolute space of NEWTON is not involved. 
Absolute velocity here means velocity relative to some frame S0 which is used throughout 
the argument, and is spoken of as fixed. 
Sect. 25. Kinetic energy. 35 
where V; is the absolute velocity of P;. Let v; be the velocity of P; relative to 0*, 
so that 
V; = v* + v;; 
then 
h = 1.: m; (r + r;) X (v* + v;), h* = 1.: m; r; X (v* + v;), 
i 
and hence 
h = mrxv* + rxl: m;v; + h*, 
where m is the total mass of the system. 
(24.7) 
(24.8) 
(24.9) 
This formula is particularly useful when 0* is the mass-centre. For then the 
middle term disappears, and we have 
h = h0 + h*, 
where 
h0 = rxmv*, h* = 1.: r;x (m;v;); 
{24.10) 
(24.11) 
h0 may be called the orbital angular momentum and h* the spin angular momentum, to borrow the terms of quantum mechanics. We note that h0 is the angular 
momentum about 0 of a fictitious particle of mass m, moving with the masscentre, and h* is the angular momentum of the system about the mass-centre; 
in computing h* it is actually a matter of indifference whether we use the velocities relative to the mass-centre, as in (24.11), or the absolute velocities. 
It is well to emphasise that, in any computation of angular momentum, we 
need to specify (i) a frame of reference relative to which velocities are measured, 
and (ii) a point about which moments are taken. 
For a rigid body turning about a fixed point 0 with angular velocity w, the 
angular momentum about 0 is 
h = 1.: m;r;XV; = 1.: m;r;x (wxr,) =w 1.: m.,rz- 1.: m;r;(w · r;). (24.12) 
Resolution of this vector equation on any orthogonal triad gives the components 
h1 = A w1 - H w2 - G w3 , ) 
h2 : -Hw1+ Bw2 -Fw3 , 
h3 -- Gw1 - Fw2 + Cw3 , 
(24.13) 
where (w1 , w2 , w3) are the components of wand A, B, C,F, G, Hare the moments 
and products of inertia relative to the triad. 
If the triad is principal, then these equations simplify to 
(24.14) 
To secure this simplicity for all time, it is, in general, necessary to fix the triad 
in the body. But in a case of symmetry (A= B), a triad with one member along 
the axis of symmetry suffices. Then the triad is fixed neither in space nor in 
the body; note that in (24.14) the components of angular velocity are those of 
the body, not the triad. 
25. Kinetic energy. The kinetic energy of a particle is T = !mv2, where m is 
the mass and v the absolute velocity; for a system of particles the kinetic energy is 
T = 1.: -! m; vz = ! 1.: m; V; • V;. (25.1) i 
3* 
J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 25. 
Let v be the absolute velocity of the mass-centre of a system, v, the absolute 
velocity of a particle of the system, and v~ its velocity relative to the mass-centre. 
Then v,=v+v~. and (25.1) gives 
T -.! 2+ ~ 1 1 2 - 2 m v L.. 2 m, v, , (25.2) 
i 
since L m,v~ = 0; here m is the total mass. This is the theorem of KoNIG: the 
i 
kinetic energy of any system is the sum of two parts: ( i) the absolute kinetic energy 
of a fictitious particle of mass m moving with the mass-centre, and ( ii) the kinetic 
energy of the motion relative to the mass-centre. 
For a rigid body turning about a fixed point with angular velocity w, the 
kinetic energy is 
T=!L:m,(wxr,) 2 l 
i (25.3) =! (Aw~ + Bw~ + Cw~- 2Fw2 w3 - 2Gw3 w1 - 2H w1 w2), 
where A, B, C, F, G, Hare the moments and products of inertia. When principal 
axes are used, this reduces to 
T = ! (A w~ + B w~ + C w~) . (25 .4) 
When the positions of the principal axes are described by the Eulerian angles 
(Sect. 11), by (19.4) the kinetic energy is 
T = ! A (0 sin VJ- cP sin{} COSVJ)2 +! B (iJ. cos VJ + cP sin{} sin VJ) 2 + } (25.5) + !C('IjJ +ci;cos{))2. 
For rotation about a fixed axis, whether principal or not, we have 
(25.6) 
where I is the moment of inertia about the axis. 
In terms of the symmetric inertia matrix I,. of (21.7), the kinetic energy is 
T= T(w) = !I,.w,w., (25.7) 
with summation over 1, 2, 3 understood for repeated subscripts here and below, 
and by (24.13) we have 
h, = I,.w., T =! h,w,. 
In terms of the reciprocal matrix],., satisfying I,.],,=tJ.,, we have 
w,=],.h., T=T(h) =i],.h,h •. 
Therefore 
8T(w) = h 
8w, '' 
For principal axes we have the formulae 
T= ~ (Aw~ + Bw: + Cw~) I = _!__ (hf + n: + hi) 2 A B C 
= + (hlwl + h2w2 + h3w3). J 
(25.8) 
(25.9) 
(25.10) 
(25.11) 
Sect. 26. Force systems. 37 
26. Force systems. Consider forces F; (i = 1, 2, ... , P) acting on P particles 
with position vectors r; relative to a base-point 0. The force F; is regarded as 
made up of two parts: an external force F;' and an internal force F;", the latter 
being the resultant of reactions exerted on the particle i by the other particles of 
the system. 
We accept, as an hypothesis or axiom, NEWTON's Third Law1 : this states 
that the force exerted by particle i on particle f is equal and opposite to the 
force exerted by particle f on particle i, and that the two forces lie on the line 
joining the particles. This law, commonly called the law of Action and Reaction, 
is equivalently expressed by writing 
p 
F;"= 2: A;i(r1 - r;) (i = 1, 2, ... , P), i~l 
where Aii are scalar factors satisfying A;i=Ai;· 
(26.1) 
Now, for any system of forces (.F; acting at r;), the total force F and the 
total moment (or torque) G about the base-point 0 are respectively 
p 
G = l:r;XF;. (26.2) 
The given system of forces is said to be equipollent 2 to a single force F acting 
at 0 and a couple G. 
Note that F is a bound vector and G a free vector. If we change the basepoint 0, F remains unchanged but G changes; by suitable choice of 0 we can 
reduce the force system to a wrench, i.e. we can make G = pF, where p is a scalar 
factor, called the pitch of the wrench. 
The vector pair (F, G) is called a motor 3 or a torsor 4 . It does not change if 
we slide the vectors F; along their lines of action, and hence it is easily seen that 
the internal forces F;" contribute nothing to it. Therefore the total force and the 
total moment are given by P P 
F=l:F;', G=l:r;x.F;', (26.3) i~l i~l 
in which formulae only the external forces occur. This elimination of internal 
forces is of fundamental importance in Newtonian dynamics. 
The work done by5 a force Fin a displacement br of its point of application 
is F · br, and for a system of forces the work is 
bW = 2: F; · br;. (26.4) ; 
If the forces act on a rigid body, and this body is given an infinitesimal displacement consisting of an infinitesimal translation br0 and an infinitesimal rotation 
bx about a base-point, then .ll .ll .ll , (26.S) 
ur; = uro + uxxr;, 
1 "To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction: or, the mutual actions of 
two bodies upon each other are always equal, and directed to contrary parts". Sir IsAAC 
NEWTON's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philisophy and his System of the World, 
MoTTE's translation revised by F. CAJORI, p. 13. Berkeley: University of California Press 
1946. Cf. Sect. 5 of the present article for a more general law, consistent with the homogeneity 
and isotropy of space. 2 The word equivalent is often used, but it is misleading, since there is equivalence only 
if the particles on which the forces act form a rigid body. 
3 For references to motor symbolism, see Sect. 49. 
4 Cf. PERES [20], p. 9. 5 The work done against the force is - F · (j '1'. 
J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 27· 
where r~ is the position vector relative to the base-point. The work done in this 
displacement is 
dW = F · dr0 + i~~~ • (dx_xr~) } 
= F · dr0 + G · dx_, 
in the notation of (26.2). 
(26.6) 
Given a plane II passing through a point 0, any infinitesimal rotation about 0 
may be resolved into two infinitesimal rotations, one (d1 x_} about an axis perpendicular to II and the other (!52 x.) about an axis in II. If a couple is represented 
by a pair of equal opposite forces (magnitude P, distance apart p) in the plane II, 
then the work done by it in an infinitesimal rotation is ± p P d1x, the sign depending on whether the senses of the couple and the rotation are the same or opposite. 
If two equal and opposite forces F, -F, act at points r, r', then the work 
done in arbitrary infinitesimal displacements is 
dW = F · (dr- dr'). (26.7) 
If, further, the forces act along the line joining the points, we may write 
F = {} (r-r'), where {} is some scalar factor, and (26. 7) becomes 
(26.8) 
This vanishes if the displacements are such as to keep the distance I r-r'l unchanged. Since by NEWTON's Third Law the reactions between any pair of 
particles of a system satisfy the above conditions on F, it follows that no work 
is done by the reactions in a rigid body. Other cases of workless reactions are 
(a) reactions at smooth contacts, (b) reactions at rolling contacts (with no sliding). 
All such reactions disappear from those general equations of dynamics which 
are based on energy and work. 
IV. Generalized coordinates. 
27. Holonomic systems. Moving constraints. A configuration of a system 
composed of P particles may always be described by giving the 3 P coordinates 
of the particles, but a smaller number suffices if these 3 P coordinates are connected 
by equations of constraint. Thus, if the system is rigid and has a fixed point, 
three coordinates suffice (e.g. the Eulerian angles of Sect. 11). Any set of parameters whic!l completely determine the configuration of a system are called 
generalized coordinates; their rates of change are generalized velocities. 
Suppose that N generalized coordinates qe (and no smaller number) describe 
the configurations of system, and that it is possible to vary qe arbitrarily and 
independently without violating the constraints (such as rigidity); then we say 
that the system is holonomic, with N degrees of freedom. 
The following are examples of holonomic systems, with the numbers of degrees of freedom indicated: 
rigid body with fixed point (3). 
free rigid body (6), 
rigid body moving parallel to a plane (3), 
rigid body in contact with a fixed plane (5). 
A system may be subject to moving constraints (e.g. a particle may be constrained to move on a surface which itself moves in some prescribed manner). 
Then, to describe a configuration, we need the time t as well as the generalized 
Sect. 28. Non-holonomic systems. 39 
coordinates q11 , and the system is holonomic if arbitrary independent variations 
of q11 and t do not violate the constraints. A system with fixed constraints is 
scleronomic; with moving constraints, rheonomic. 
If (x;, y,, z1) are the coordinates of the i-th particle of a system, relative to 
fixed axes 0 xyz, the selection of generalized coordinates sets up equations of 
the form 
X0 = x.(q1 , q2 , ... qN, t), Yi = y.(q1 , q2 , ... qN, t). Z; = Z; (q1 , q2 , .. • qN, t), (27.1) 
t being absent for a scleronomic system1• 
The kinetic energy of a rheonomic system is 
T = 2 1 L; ~ m; ( X;+ '2 y, '2 + Z; '2) ) 
i=1 
N N 
= i 2;1aeaq/Ja + L aeqe +a; 11 ,a=1 e=1 
(27.2) 
here a11 a, a11 and a are functions of q1 , ... qN, t. For a scleronomic system this 
reduces to N 
T = 1"' . . ( ) 2 £.., aoaqpqa, 27.3 
p,a=l 
a positive-definite 2 quadratic form by virtue of the definition of T, the coefficients a9 a being function of q1 , ... qN. 
28. Non-holonomic systems. Consider a rigid lamina which can slide freely 
over a fixed plane; this is a scleronomic holonomic system with three degrees of 
freedom. But now suppose that a small sharp blade is fixed in the lamina, the 
blade being capable of motion only in the direction of its length. If (x, y) are 
the Cartesian coordinates of the blade and {} its inclination to the x-axis, then 
(x, y, {}) form a system of generalized coordinates for the lamina, but they are 
subject to the non-integrable relation 
{~=tan-D. (28.1} 
The number of generalized coordinates cannot be reduced below three, but 
these three coordinates are not freely variable. 
We call a system non-holonomic when it is impossible to describe the configurations by generalized coordinates q11 (e = 1, 2, ... N) and the time t, with 
q11 and t freely and independently variable. In such cases there are present 
certain non-integrable 3 equations of constraint of the form 
N L Ac 11 dq0 + Acdt = 0, (c = 1, 2, ... M); e=l 
(28.2) 
1 But even for a system without moving constraints it may be convenient to use equations 
of the form (27.1). For example, to study the motion of a free rigid body (e.g. a rocket) 
relative to the earth (the motion of the latter being known), we might let q1 , q2 , •.. q6 describe 
the configuration of the body relative to axes fixed in the earth; then the equations giving 
the coordinates of the particles of the body relative to fixed axes will be of the form (27.1), 
the time t entering through _the earth's motion. From an analytic standpoint, it is sometimes 
convenient to use the word scleronomic when t is absent from (27.1) and rheonomic when 
it is present, without regard to the physical system under consideration. 2 T > 0 unless q1 = · · · = qN = 0. 3 PERES [20], p. 218, calls a system semi-holonomic if the equations of constraint are 
integrable, with constants of integration dependent on initial conditions. Mathematically, 
a semi-holonomic system is not very different from a holonomic system, since the integrated 
equations of constraint may be used to reduce the number of generalized coordinates. 
40 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 28. 
here Ace and Ac are functions of the variables (q, t). The system is said to have 
N- M degrees of freedom. 
The formulae (27.2) and (27.3) for kinetic energy are valid for non-holonomic 
systems. 
Non-holonomicity usually occurs in systems with rolling contacts, the condition of rolling being the equality of the instantaneous velocities of the two 
particles at the point of contact, one particle belonging to each body1 • The 
following examples illustrate non-holonomic constraints due to rolling. 
oc) Sphere rolling on a horizontal plane. Let (I, J, K) be a fixed orthonormal triad 
with origin 0 in the given plane and K vertical (Fig. 9). As generalized coordinates we take (x, y, {}, cp, VJ) where (x, y) are the coordinates of the point of contact 
relative to axes 0 xy drawn along I and J, and ({}, cp, VJ) are the Eulerian angles 
(X,y) 
Fig. 9. Sphere rolling on plane. 
(Sect. 11) which describe the position 
of an orthonormal triad (i,j, k), fixed 
in the sphere, relative to (I, J, K). 
Relative to the centre C of the 
sphere, the position vector of the 
point of contact is- bK, where b is 
the radius of the sphere. Therefore, by 
( 19.2), the velocity of that particle of 
the sphere which is instantaneously 
in contact with the plane is 
xi+yJ+wx(-bK), (28.3) 
where w is the angular velocity of 
the sphere. Resolving the angular 
velocity along (I, J, K), we have 
w =!J1I +D2J -T-!J3K, (28.4) 
where the coefficients are expressed in terms of the Eulerian angles and their 
rates of change as in (19.5). Substituting {28.4) in (28.3), and equating the result 
to zero (condition of rolling), we get the following two non-integrable equations 
of constraint: 
x- b (~cos cp + ,P sin{} sin q;) = 0, } 
y- b (D sin cp - ,P sin{} cos q;) = 0. 
The sphere has 5 - 2 = 3 degrees of freedom. 
(28.5) 
{3) Circular disc rolling on a horizontal plane 2• Let (I, J, K) be a fixed orthonormal triad with origin 0 in the given plane and K vertical (Fig. 10). With 
these as axes, the position vector of the centre C of the disc is 
r=xi +yJ +zK. (28.6) 
Let (i,j, k) by a second orthonormal triad centred at C, i being directed to the 
point of contact, j being horizontal, and k perpendicular to the plane of the disc. 
1 It is by no means always desirable to use generalized coordinates in the discussion of 
non-holonomic systems; RouTH [22] II, pp. 165-205, applies direct methods with great 
elegance. For an extensive treatment of non-holonomic systems, with problems worked out 
in detail and consideration of non-linear constraints, see HAMEL [11], pp. 464-507. See 
also WINKELMANN and GRAMMEL [29], pp. 434-440. For the dynamics of non-holonomic 
systems in the present article, see Sects. 46, 48, 85. 2 For the dynamics of a rolling disc, see APPELL [2] II, pp. 253-258. 
Sect. 28. Non-holonomic systems. 41 
Let {} be the inclination of - i to K, cp the inclination to I of the tangent to the 
disc at the point ofcontact, and 1p the inclination to i of a radius fixed in the 
disc. Then (if b = radius of disc) 
z = b cos{}, (28.7) 
and (x, y, {}, cp, 1p) form a system 
of generalized coordinates. z K 
The velocity of C is 
v=xi+yJ-bsin{}0-K, (28.8) 
and the angular velocity of the 
disc is 
w =-Jj + rj;K + ipk, (28.9) 
as we see on increasing each of 
the angles in turn. Hence, by 
( 19.2), the velocity of the particle of the disc instantaneously .x I 
in contact with the plane is Fig. 10. Circular disc rolling on plane. 
v + w X b i =xI+ y J- b sin{} J K + b J k + b ( ip + rp sin{}) j, (28.1 0) 
smce 
We have 
K = - cos{} i + sin {} k. 
j =cos cpi +sin cpJ, 
k =cos{} sin cp I- cos{} cos cpJ +sin{} K, 
(28.11) 
} (28.12) 
and when these are substituted in (28.10), the condition of rolling gives the 
following two non-integrable equations of constraint: 
x + b cos {} sin cp J. + b cos cp ( ip + sin {} rp) = 0 , } 
y- b cos{} cos cp J. + b sin cp (ip +sin{} rp) = 0. 
The disc has 5 - 2 = 3 degrees 
of freedom. 
y) Axle with pair of wheels 
which roll on a plane. We 
suppose that each wheel is free 
to turn about the axle. (If they 
were both fixed to the axle 
we would have a holonomic .x 
system with one degree of 
freedom.) Let b be the radius 
of each wheel and 2 c the length 
of the axle. We take generalized coordinates (x, y, cp, 1p, 1p') 
(28.13) 
as shown in Fig. 11. Then, 
computing the components of 
velocity, parallel and perpendicular to the axle, of the two 
Fig. II. Axle with pair of wheels which roll on a plane. 
particles instantaneously in contact with the plane, and then equating these 
components to zero to satisfy the condition of rolling, we get the following three 
42 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
equations of constraint: 
x cos q; + y sin q; = 0 , ) 
- x sin q; + y cos q; + c rp + b ip = 0 , 
- x sin q; + y cos q; - c rp + b ip' = 0 . 
The last two yield the integrable combination 
2 c rp + b ( ip - ip') = 0. 
If we are given initial values of the three angles, we have 
2 c q; = A - b ( 1p - 1p'), 
Sect. 29· 
(28.14) 
(28.15) 
(28.16) 
where A is a given constant; we may then take (x, y, 1p, 1p') as generalized coordinates, with the two non-integrable equations of constraint: 
x cos q; + y sin q; = 0 , } 
- x sin q; + y cos q; + t b ( ip + ip') = 0. (28.17) 
The system has 4- 2 = 2 degrees of freedom. 
29. Generalized forces. Work. Potential function. Consider a system of 
P particles, in general rheonomic and non-holonomic. Let forces with components (X;*,¥;*, Zt) act on the particles with coordinates (x;, Y;. z;). Then, in 
any completely arbitrary set of infinitesimal displacements of the particles, 
all constraints being disregarded, the work done by these forces is 
p 
t5 W = L (X£ h; + Y;* t5y; + Z;* t5z;). (29.1) 
i=l 
Now if (qe, t) describe the configurations of the system, we have equations of 
the form (27.1), and so the work done in the displacement corresponding to 
arbitrary variations (t5qg, t5t) is 
N 
t5 w = L Q: t5qe + Q* t5t, (29.2) 
(>=1 
where p 
Q* = L (x~ ox; + Y* oy; + Z* ~z;_) e i=l • oqg • oqe • oqe ' (29.3) 
p 
Q* = '\' (x* ox; + Y* oy• + Z* ~zi_) LJ • ot • ot • ot . i=l 
(29.4) 
The quantities Q: are generalized forces; they are usually easier to calculate 
from (29.2) than from (29.3). 
The total force (X;*, Y;*, Z;*) acting on a particle of the system can in general 
be split into two parts: 
(X;, Y;, Z;) = given force 1, such as gravity, } 
(X;, Y/, z;) =force of constraint. 
Then the total generalized force Q: can be split into two parts: 
Q:= Qe+ Q~. 
1 Also called applied force. 
(29.5) 
(29.6) 
Sect. 30. Basic equations. 43 
so that Qe is the given generalized force and Q~ the generalized force of constraint; 
we suppose Qe to be known functions of q1 , ... qN, t, ql> ... qN, and possibly of 
ij1 , ... ij N also. 
The importance of this splitting is due to the fact that in many dynamical 
sys~ems the forces of constraint are workless, by which we mean that these forces 
do no work in a displacement ~qe which satisfies the instantaneous constraint 
(with ~t=O). This implies N 
L: Q;~qe = 0, 
e=l 
so that the work done by all forces in this displacement is 
N 
~W= L Qe~qe. 
e=l 
If there exists a function V(q1 , •.• qN, t) such that 
oV 
Qe=- oqe' 
so that by (29.8) 
~W=-~V, 
(29.7) 
(29.8) 
(29.9) 
(29.10) 
then Vis the potential function 1, or potential energy, of the system. More generally, 
if there exists a function V(q1 , ••• qN, t, q1 , ... qN) such that 
(29.11) 
then V is an extended potential function. 
C. Dynamics of a particle. 
I. Equations of motion. 
30. Basic equations. NEWTON's first two laws are embodied in the equation 
d dt (mv) = F, (30.1) 
where m is the mass of a particle, v its absolute velocity, and F the force acting 
on it. If m is constant (as we shall assume it to be), then (30.1) is equivalent to 
ma=F, (30.2) 
where a is the absolute acceleration. 
Let xe be curvilinear coordinates in absolute space (cf. Sects. 17, 18). Then, 
by (18.3), the equation of motion (30.2) may be written in the contravariant 
form · 
(30.3) 
Here Ffl is the contravariant forcevector; the covariant force vector~ may be 
calculated from the invariant formula 
(30.4) 
1 French writers prefer to speak of a force function U, where U = - V. 
44 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 31. 
where (J W is the work done by the force in an arbitrary displacement (Jxe, and 
P is obtained from ~ by the formula 
pe = geP F,_.. (30.5) 
By (18.5) the covariant form of the equation of motion is1 
d aT aT 
ma =-------=F 
e dt axe axe P' (30.6) 
where 
T = fmge"xvx", (30.7) 
the kinetic energy of the particle. If a potential function 2 V(x, t) exists [cf. 
{29.9)], such that 
(30.8) 
or, more generally, an extended potential function 2 V(x, x, t) such that [ cf. {29.11)] 
{30.9) 
then {30.6) may be written 
{30.10) 
where L is the Lagrangian function 
L= T-V. (30.11) 
For motion in a plane, the most convenient coordinates are usually either 
rectangular Cartesians (x, y), for which the equations of motion are 
mx=X, my=Y, (30.12) 
or polar coordinates (r, if), for which they read 
m(r-r0.2)=R, m+-ft(r2 0.)=8, (30.13) 
where R is the radial component of force and 8 the transverse component. 
In space, we may conveniently use cylindrical coordinates (18.8) or spherical 
polars (18.10). 
31. Energy. Angular momentum. From (30.2) we deduce 
dT aT= F. v, (31.1) 
so that the ra,te of increase of kinetic energy is equal to the rate of working (or 
activity or power) of the force F. If there exists a potential function V(x) (independent oft), then {31.1) gives the energy integral 
E being the total energy. 
Also, by (30.2) we have 
or 
T + V = E = const, 
rxma=rx F, 
dh 
---= G 
dt ' 
1 These are Lagrangian equations, as in ( 46.1 7). 
(31.2) 
{31-3) 
(31.4) 
2 Here and later, X stands for the three quantities xe, and i for the three quantities xe. 
Sect. 32. Moving frames of reference. 45 
where h is the angular momentum about the origin 0 and G the moment of F 
about 0. If the line of action ofF passes through 0, we have G=O and 
h = const. (31.5) 
This is the integral of angular momentum. In the case of a particle moving in 
a plane under the action of a force directed to, or from, the origin, it gives 
r2 J. = const , (31.6) 
from which it follows that the radius vector drawn from the origin to the particle 
traces out equal areas in equal times. It is useful to remember that 
(31.7) 
where v is the speed and p the perpendicular dropped from the origin on the 
tangent to the orbit. 
32. Moving frames of reference. Let S be a rigid body which has a prescribed 
motion relative to absolute space. This motion is described by selecting some 
base point 0 in S, giving the absolute velocity v 0 (t) of 0, and also giving the 
angular velocity w of S. We take S as a moving frame of reference. Then 
the absolute acceleration a of a particle, acted on by a force F, may be broken 
down as in (20.10}, and the equation of motion (30.2) may be written 
m a' = F + F0 + F, + Fe, 
where m is the mass of the particle and 
F0 =-ma0
F, = - mac= , 
-2m w X v', 
l 
Fe=- ma1= -mwXT' -mwx (<.oXT') 
=-mwXT'- mw (w · 1'') + mw21''. 
(32.1) 
(32.2) 
In (32.1) a' is the relative acceleration, i.e. the acceleration as observed by an 
observer carried along with S, and we may say that, relative to a moving frame 
of reference, NEWTON's law of motion holds in the form 
ma'=F', (32.3) 
where F' is made up of the real force F and the three fictitious forces Fo, F,, Fe; 
here F0 arises solely from the acceleration of the base point (and is present even 
if S is not rotating) ; F, is the CoRIOLIS force, a force of great importance in meteorology and i:ndeed in all phenomena involving the rotation of the earth; 
Fe is of the nature of centrifugal force, although that term is properly applied 
only when w is constant, in which case we have [ cf. (20.14) J 
(32.4) 
If the motion of Sis a uniform velocity, we have a0 =w=0, and (32.1) gives 
ma'=F, (32.5) 
which means that such a frame is a Newtonian frame. This result is known 
as Newtonian relativity; st3.!1:ing with an absolute space S0 and NEWTON's law 
of motion relative to S0 , we find that this law holds also for any frame S in 
uniform motion. 
46 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 33. 
II. One-dimensional motions. 
33. Simple harmonic oscillator. Damping. A simple harmonic oscillator is a 
particle which moves on a line under the influence of a restoring force directed 
to a point 0 on the line and proportional to the distance from 0. If a frictional 
damping force, proportional to the velocity and opposing it, is added, and also a 
disturbing force, the equation of motion reads 
x + 2px + P2 x =X (33.1) 
where 
restoring force = - m p2 x, l 
damping force= - 2m px, 
disturbing force = m X, 
(33.2) 
m being the mass of the particle. For the undamped undisturbed oscillator, the 
motion is given by 
where 
x+p2 x=O, } 
x = a cos (p t + e), 
a = amplitude\ 
p 2 :n; • d' t' = peno 1c une, 
__p_ = v = frequency, 2:n: 
p = 2nv = w =circular frequency, 
p t + e = fP = phase angle, 
e =phase constant. 
(33.3) 
The oscillator is said to be "in the same phase" for two values of fP differing by 
a multiple of 2n. The solution (33.3) may also be written in complex form 
x=AeiPt, (33.4) 
where A is a complex amplitude, which includes the phase constant; the physical 
displacement xis the real part of (33.4). 
If X= 0, the general solution of the damped Eq. (33.1) is, in complex form, 
x = A e"'' + B e"•', 
where n1 , n2 are the roots of 
(33.5) 
(33.6) 
These roots may real or complex, giving non-oscillatory and oscillatory motions 
respectivelys. 
When damping and disturbing forces are both present, the latter being a 
given function oft, the general solution of (33.1) is 
I 
x =A e"•'+Be"•' + - 1-jX(-r){e"•(t-Tl- e"•(t-Tl}d-r. (33.7) "t- nz 0 
1 Sometimes 2a is called the amplitude, and a the semi-amplitude. 1 The damping constant p. being positive, the real part of each root is necessarily negative; 
for details, see SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], pp. 163-166. 
Sect. 34. Circular and cycloidal pendulums. 47 
For a sinusoidal disturbing force, we write 
X(t) = X 0 eiqt; (3 J.8) 
then (33-7) becomes 
(33-9) 
where A' and B' are new arbitrary constants. As t--+ oo, the first two terms die 
away, and we are left with the forced oscillation 
X 0 eiqt X 0 eiqt 
X=(iq-n1)(iq-n2) p2-q2+2ip.q" (33.10) 
The amplitude is large (resonance) if (p- q) and I' are small, that is, when the 
frequency of the disturbing force is nearly equal to that of the undamped free 
oscillator and the damping is smalF. 
34. Circular and cycloidal pendulums. Consider a particle of mass m moving 
under gravity on a smooth vertical circle of radius l (circular pendulum). If {} 
is the angular displacement from the downward vertical, the total energy is 
t m l2 .0.2 + m g l ( 1 - cos{}) = E = const, (34.1) 
and the equation of motion is 
(34.2) 
For small amplitudes, this reduces to the Eq. (33-3) for the harmonic oscillator 
and the periodic time is 
In general, we get an oscillatory motion if 
Wo = l~lo=o < 2P, 
and the motion is given by 
sin if}= sin foc sn P (t- t0), 
where oc is the maximum value of {}, so that 
. 1 1 w0 sm -- oc = - -- - 2 2 p ' 
(34.3) 
(34.4) 
(34.5) 
(34.6) 
t0 is an arbitrary constant, and the Jacobian elliptic function sn has sin ioc for 
modulus 2• 
The period is l (34.7) 
= 2
pn [ 1 + ( ~ r k2 + ( ~:~ r k4 + .. ·] J 
where k =sin t oc; this gives, to order oc2, 
r=2n V-}[1 +-~i]. (34.8) 
1 Cf. (104.19) for the generalization of (33.10) to an oscillating system with more degrees 
of freedom. 
2 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], p. 72; SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], p. 371. 
48 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 35. 
If w0 > 2p, the motion is no longer oscillatory, the particle going round 
and round the circle. In this case the solution is1 
sin ! D- = sn ~ (t - t0), (34-9) 
where k = 2Pfw0 < 1, and the modulus of sn is k. 
If w0 = 2p, the particle reaches the highest point of the circle in an infinite 
time, the motion being given by 2 
sin !-D=Tanp(t-t0). {34.10) 
For motion under gravity on any smooth curve in a vertical plane, the equation of motion is .. dz 
s + gds = 0' (34.11) 
where s is arc length and z height above some fixed level. If 
z = k s2, 
we get s + 2gks =0, 
(34.12) 
(34.13) 
the same form of equation as for a harmonic oscillator. The period is then independent of amplitude, and the curve (34.12), which is a cycloid, is called a 
tautochrone for the force of gravity3• 
III. Two-dimensional motions. 
35. Projectiles. For a particle of mass m which moves in a uniform gravitational 
field, in a resisting medium with density depending only on height, the equations of motion are · x=-l(v,y) :. y=-g-l(v,y)~. (35.1) 
Here the x-axis is horizontal, the y-a~is is directed vertically upwards, and 
ml(v, y) is the force of resistance, opposing the motion; vis the speed. 
If I= 0, we get the elementary parabolic trajectory, 
x=a+bt, y=c+et-igt 2 , (35.2) 
where a, b, c, e are constants determined by the initial conditions'. If l=kv, 
the Eqs. (35.1) have simple exponential solutions 5• Integration can also be 
carried out explicitly6 for l=k0 +kv", which contains, as a special case 7, resistance varying as the square of the speed (I= k v2). 
The integration of equations of the form (35.1) is a central problem in exterior ballistics, the function l(v, y) being given numerically or by some empirical 
formula 8. Numerical integration is used. 
1 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], P· 73-
2 The hyperbolic functions sinh, cosh, tanh are printed Sin, Cos, Tan throughout this 
Encyclopedia. 3 For tautochrones and brachistochrones (curves of quickest descent), see APPELL [2] I, 
pp. 478-489; MACMILLAN [17] I, pp: 322-329. 4 For geometrical constructions connected with parabolic trajectories, see APPELL [2] I, 
p. 374; LAMB [13], p. 72; SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], p.151. 5 Cf. SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], p. 159. 8 Cf. APPELL [2] I, p. 383; MAcMILLAN [17] I, p. 256. This is the integrable case of 
LEGENDRE. 
7 Cf. SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], p. 157. 8 For the older approach to exterior ballistics, seeP. CHARBONNIER: Traite de Balistique 
exterieure (2vols.) (Paris: Doin&Gauthier-Villars 1921-1927); and for the modern approach, see E. J. McSHANE, J. L. KELLEY and F. RENo: Exterior Ballistics (Denver: University Press 1953). 
Sect. 36. KEPLER problem. 49 
36. KEPLER problemr. In the KEPLER problem, a particle of mass m is attracted to (or repelled from) a fixed point 0 by a force which varies as the inverse square of its distance r from 0. Let the inward component of this force 
be m11fr2 (ft positive for attraction, negative for repulsion). By symmetry, the 
orbit is plane, and, in terms of polar coordinates (r, {}) in the plane of the orbit, 
the equations of motion are [cf. (30.13)] 
(36.1) 
where h is a constant, the angular momentum per unit mass [ cf. (31.6) J. The 
kinetic and potential energies per unit mass are 
V= _ _!!_ 
r (36.2) 
and we have the equation of energy 
T+ V=E, (36.3) 
where E is a constant, the total energy per unit mass. 
Putting u=1/r, and eliminating t from (36.1), we get 
d2 u p, 
d{}2- +u = h2 (36.4) 
and hence 
u = }!_ + c cos ({} - {} ) h2 0 ' (36.5) 
where C, {}0 are constants of integration. From (36.3), C is determined in terms 
of E and h, and we can make {}0 = 0 by choice of the line {} = 0; then the equation 
of the orbit may be written 
1 1 
u =--; = T (1 + ecos{}), (36.6) 
where 
h2 
l = ---, 
1-' 
V--2-Eh2 
e = 1 + -1-'2·- • (36.7) 
The orbit is a conic section of eccentricity e; it is an ellipse, parabola or hyperbola according as E <O, E=O, or E > 0, respectively, the centre of force 
being a focus of the conic. 
If the force is repulsive, then !-' < 0, E > 0, and only the hyperbolic orbit 
occurs; it is that branch of the hyperbola which is convex towards 0. 
For an elliptical orbit, the semi-axis-major a and the eccentricity e determine 
the orbit; likewise E and h determine it. The relations between these constants are 
a=-_!!_ 2E' 
E =- __!!__ 
2a' 
The speed v at distance r is given by 
v2=t-t (~ - :). 
(36.8) 
(36.9) 
1 For the solution of the KEPLER problem by means of the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation, 
see Sect. 78, or APPELL [2] I, 592- 596. For the relativistic KEPLER problem, see Sect. 11 5. 
For a force of the form r-2 <1>({}), see APPELL [2] I, p. 408. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/I. 4 
50 J. L. SYNGE: Clas~ical Dynamics. Sect. 37. 
and the period is 
T = -- 1 - e2 = 2n - = • 2na2 v-- vaa np. 
h , v- 2E3 (36.10) 
We cannot enter here into the details of elliptical (planetary) orbits, fundamental in celestial mechanics1. 
37. Central forces in general. For a particle of mass m repelled from a fixed 
point 0 by a force mF(u), where u= 1jr, the Eq. (30.13) give 
(37.1) 
and hence 
(37.2) 
The case of attraction is here included, F being then negative. A potential V 
exists, given by r 
V(u) =-f Fdr, . (37.3) 
•• 
where r 0 is any constant, and the energy equation T + V =E leads to 
( du)2+ 2 =2(E-V) 
d{} u h2 ' (37.4) 
which is, of course, a first integral of (37.2). This equation can be solved by a 
quadrature, being of the form 2 
~)2 = I ( ) = 2 (E - V) - 2 
d{} u h2 u . 
To relate the time t to the variables (u, D), we have, by (37.1), 
dt = r2d{} = ± du 
h hu2Vf(u)' 
the sign being chosen to make dt positive. 
(37.5) 
(37.6) 
The apsides of an orbit are those points at which r is a maximum or a minimum; thus apsides occur for u=u1 , u=u2 , where 
(37.7) 
The apsidal angle is 
(37.8) 
The whole orbit may be obtained from the part between two adjacent apsides, 
since the orbit is symmetric with respect to any apsidal radius. The whole orbit 
is contained between (and touches) two concentric circles, but in exceptional 
cases the radius of the inner circle may be zero and the radius of the outer circle 
infinite. · 
1 For the anomalies, KEPLER's equation and LAMBERT's theorem, see APPELL [2] I, 
pp. 434-448; WHITTAKER [28], pp. 89-92; WINTNER [30], Chap. 4. Also MACMILLAN [17] I, 
pp. 278-292, where a repulsive force is included. 2 An equation of this type is of frequent occurrence in dynamics, leading in general to 
periodic solutions. Elliptic functions may be discussed in terms of such an equation; cf. 
PERES [20], pp. 107-122, SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], pp. 364-370. 
Sect. 38. Stability of circular orbits. 51 
Borrowing the words from astronomy, we may call any one of the apsides 
on the inner circle perihelion, and any one of the outer apsides aphelion. 
When the force varies as r(F=ek2 r, e= ±1), the motion is more simply 
discussed by means of rectangular Cartesians; we have 
X = f k2 X' ji = f k2 y. 
If e = - 1, the orbit IS a central ellipse, with equations 
x = A cos k t + B sin k t, } 
y = C cos kt + D sin kt. 
(37-9) 
(37.10) 
If e = + 1, the solution is similarly expressed in hyperbolic functions; the orbit 
is a central hyperbola. In special cases (vanishing angular momentum) the orbit 
is a straight line through the origin; then we have a simple harmonic oscillator 
in the case e= -1. 
38. Stability of circular orbits. For a circular orbit of radius r = 1fu, we require 
f(u)=O, f'(u)=O. (38.1) 
The first condition is a consequence of (37.5), and the second follows from (37.2), 
which is equivalent to 
(38.2) 
Putting u = u0 for the circular orbit, we write 
u = u0 +; (38.3) 
for a disturbed orbit (;is small), and obtain from (38.2) and (38.1), to the first 
order in ;, 
d2~ 1 i:f"( ) df)2 = 2 s- Uo . 
This has sinusoidal solutions (giving stability) if and only if 
f"(u0 ) < 0. 
(38.4) 
(38.5) 
Thus we have the following criterion for stability of a circular orbit of radius 
r = 1/u, described under a central attractive force: 
-1 I" ( ) U=-1----<0. 1 d ( F ) 2 h2 du u 2 (38.6) 
Here F is negative, the magnitude of the attractive force being - mF. But, 
by (37.2), applied to the circular orbit, we have 
and so the criterion for stability may be written 
dF 
3F<ulii: 
or 
(38.7) 
(38.8) 
(38.9) 
If the attractive force varies as r-n, there is stability if, and only if, n <3· 
4* 
52 j. L. SYNGE: Ciassical Dynamics. Sect. 39. 
39. Oscillations under gravity on a fixed surface 1• Let 5 be a smooth fixed 
surface and 0 a point on it, the tangent plane at 0 being horizontal. Let 0 xyz 
be axes with 0 z directed vertically upward, and 0 x y in principal directions of 
curvature of S, so that its equation, near 0, is 
(39.1) 
approximately, R1 and R2 being the principal radii of curvature. If a particle 
of mass m moves on S, under the influence of gravity, its equations of motion 
are accurately (39.2) 
where mN is the reaction of the surface and A, fl,, y the direction cosines of the 
normal. To the first order in x, y, we have 
A=-_:-_ R' 1 
hence N = g and 
The solution is of the form 
k~ = {-, 1 
k~=; . 2 
X = A cos (kl t + B) ' } 
y = C cos (k2 t + D). 
(39-3) 
(39.4) 
(39-5) 
These curves in the xy-plane (called LISSAJOUS figures 2) represent the composition 
of simple harmonic motions with different frequencies. They are closed curves 
if k1/k2 is rational; otherwise they filP the whole rectangle x2 :s;;A2 , y2 .:s;:C2. 
A spherical pendulum consists of a heavy particle attached to a fixed point 
by a light inextensible string. This is the same thing as a particle moving under 
gravity on a smooth fixed sphere. To investigate small oscillations, we put 
R1 = R2 in the above theory; the period is 
r= 2nV , (39.6) 
and the orbit (39.5) is a central ellipse. 
Finite oscillations under gravity on a smooth sphere are much more complicated. Taking the origin at the centre of the sphere, with Oz directed vertically 
upwards, we have the four equations 
X=-- •. XN .. YN .. ZN 
y=-- Z=-- -g a ' a ' a ' (39-7) 
where a is the radius of the sphere. Alternatively, we may use conservation of 
energy (mE) and conservation of angular momentum (mh) about Oz. We obtain 
the equations 4 
(39.8) 
1 Cf. APPELL [2] I, pp. 510-541. 2 For the generation of LISSAJOUS figures by means of BLACKBURN's pendulum, see 
LAMB [13], p. 80. 
3 Cf. APPELL [2] I, p. 522. 4 For details, see APPELL [2] I, pp. 530-541; SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], pp. 375-381. 
Sect. 40. Charged particle in electromagnetic field. 53 
(r, q;, z) being cylindrical coordinates. The three zeros z1 , z2 , z3 of the cubic f (z) 
are necessarily real, with -a< z1 < z2 <a < z3 , and the solution is expressible 
in terms of elliptic functions as follows: 
where 
z - z1 = (z2 - z1) sn2 p (t - t0), l z2 - z = (z2 - z1) cn2 p (t - t0) , 
z3 - z = (z3 - z1) dn2 P (t- t0), 
and the modulus of the elliptic functions is k, where 
k2= ~-zl. 
z3- zl 
(39.9) 
(39.10) 
(39.11) 
When the oscillations are small, the projection of the orbit on the xy-plane 
is a small ellipse which rotates through a small angle 3 A/(4a2) per orbital revolution, A being the area of the ellipse. This rotation, the sense of which is the same 
as the sense in which the orbit is described, is not to be confused with the FouCAULT rotation (cf. Sect. 43). 
IV. Three-dimensional motions. 
40. Charged particle in electromagnetic field1. When a particle of mass m, 
carrying an electric charge e, moves in an electromagnetic field with electric 
vector E and magnetic vector H, the equation of motion is 2 
This gives 
ma=e(E+vxH). 
d (-1_ m v2) = e v · E 
dt 2 
and hence, if E has a potentiaP (E = -grad V), the integral of energy 
! m v2 + e V = const. 
(40.1) 
(40.2) 
(40.3) 
If E and Hare constant (uniform electromagnetic field), (40.1) is easily solved 
as follows. If H = 0, the trajectory is a parabola. If H =f= 0, we resolve v (obliquely) 
in the form 
v = v1E + v2 H + v3ExH. (40.4) 
Substituting in (40.1) and separating the components, we obtain 
v1 =-A H sin(kHt +B), l 
E·H 
v2 = C
1
- }j2{kt -AHsin(kHt +B)}, 
v3 = H 2 -A cos(kHt +B), 
(40.5) 
where k =-ejm, and A, B, C are constants of integration. The position vector 
of the particle, resolved as in (40.4), is then given by integration of (40.5). 
1 Cf. APPELL [2] I, p. 388. 2 We take E measured in electrostatic units and H in electromagnetic units; if His in 
electrostatic units, we must substitute vfc for v, where c is the ratio of the units, i.e. the 
velocity of light. The relativistic equations have the same right-hand side as above; cf. (115.8). 
3 This is always the case for a field which is independent of the time. 
54 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sects. 41, 42. 
If the electric and magnetic fields are both constant and orthogonal, we have 
E. H = O, and hence v2 = const. Taking axes 0 x y z in the directions of E, H, EX H, 
so that x=v1 E, y=v2H, Z=v3 EH, we have then 
x = x0 + A: cos ( k H t + B) , l 
y =Yo+ C t, 
z = z0 + ~ -A' sin (k H t + B) , 
(40.6) 
where A'=AEjk, C'=CH. If C=O, this represents motion in a circle in a 
plane perpendicular to H with angular velocity kH, the centre of the circle moving in a straight line perpendicular to E and H with velocity EJH. 
If E = O, the trajectory is a circular helix, with axis parallel to the magnetic 
field, described with azimuthal angular velocity H ejm. 
41. Axially symmetric electromagnetic fields. In a statical electromagnetic 
field, the electric potential V and the magnetic potential flare harmonic functions. 
If the field has the z-axis as axis of symmetry, these potentials can be expanded 
in power series : 
V = v;, (z) + t R2 li;. (z) + fi R4 ~ (z) + ... , } 
fl = fl 0 (z) +! R2fl1 (z) + ~ R4 fl2 (z) + · .. 
where R2 = x2 + y2, and we find, from LAPLACE's equation, 
V~' (z) + 2 li;. (z) = 0, V;' (z) + t V:z (z) = 0, ... 
(41.1) 
(41.2) 
with similar equations for fl, so that the coefficients in (41.1) depend only on 
the axial potentials v;,, fl 0 • The equations of motion (40.1) of a charged particle, 
moving near the z-axis, can be treated approximately. By (40.3) we find i =w, 
w2 =2k(V';,-C), where k=-efm and Cis a constant, and, on eliminating the 
time, we obtain as complex equation of the trajectory 
C" + PC' + Q C = 0, ) 
p = _UJ'__ + i kD~ Q = _1_ (w" + ~) + i k[}~' w w ' 2 w w2 2w ' 
C=x+iy. 
(41.3) 
The prime indicates djdz. Here P and Q are given functions of z. This secondorder differential equation is basic in electron optics; the crude image-forming 
properties of an electron microscope depend on itl. To investigate aberrations, 
higher approximations must be used2• 
42. Motion relative to rotating earth 3 • Here orbital motion about the sun is neglected, and the earth is regarded as a rigid body rotating with angular velocity 
.2. Let 0 xyz be rectangular axes (Fig. 12), with 0 a point on the earth's surface, 
0 z directed vertically upward (as determined by the plumb line), and 0 x pointing 
south. Let i,j, k be an orthonormal triad in the directions of these axes. To discuss 
motion relative to the earth's surface, we use this frame of reference as if it were 
fixed, adding fictitious forces as in (32.1). Let A. be the latitude of 0, and R the 
1 For some details, see SYNGE and GRIFFITH [22], pp. 387-403. 2 For the principles of geometrical optics, see the article by A. MARECHAL in Vol. XXIV 
of this Encyclopedia, and for electron optics and electron microscopes see the articles by W. 
GLASER and S. LEISEGANG in Vol. XXXIII. See also W. GLASER: Grundlagen der Elektronenoptik. Vienna: Springer 19 52. 3 Cf. APPELL [2] II, pp. 289-292, or SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], pp. 403-408 for details. 
Sect. 43. FoucAULT's pendulum. 55 
distance of 0 from the earth's axis. Then 
.2 = - Q cos Ai + Q sin .A k, } 
a0 = - R il2 sin Ai - R Q2 cos A k, ( 42.1) 
and so, if r, v now denote the position vector and velocity of a particle relative 
to Oxyz and v its relative acceleration, we have by (32.1) 
mv = F + mRQ2 (sin .Ai +cos .Ak)- 2mQ (-cos .Ai +sin .Ak) XV} - m.2x (.2xr); (42.2) 
here F is the real force acting on the particle. 
Let F0 be the force of gravity at 0. Let g be defined by stating that mg is 
the tension in a plumb line suspending a particle of mass m at 0. Then (42.2) 
are satisfied with 
F=F0 +mgk, V=O, T=O, (42.3) 
and therefore we have 
F0+mgk+mRQ2 (sin .Ai+cos .Ak)=O. (42.4) 
We now subtract (42.4) from (42.2), omitting 
the last term in (42.2) on account of the smallness of Q. This gives the equations of motion: 
(42.5) 
z 
mx =X+ 2mQ sin X .A· y l 
my= Y- 2m!J(sin A ·X+ cos A· i) 
mz =Z- mg + 2m!Jcos.A ·Y Fig. 12. Axes on rotating earth. 
where (X, Y, Z) are the components of the difference between the total real 
force acting on the particle and the force of gravity on it in the position 0. 
In the case of a free particle (projectile in vacuo), we put X= Y =Z = 0, if 
we may neglect the variations of gravity with position. Neglecting Q2, we obtain, 
for a particle starting from the origin at t=O with velocity (u0 , v0 , w0), 
x=u0 t+!Jv0 t2 sin.A, ) 
y = v0 t -Qt2 (u0 sin.A+w0 cos.A) + jQgt3 cos.A, 
z = w0 t -!gt2 +!Jv0 t2 cos.A. 
(42.6) 
For free fall from rest at height h, there is a deviation to the east of amount 
1 v2h -Q cos .A· 2h --. (42.7) 3 g 
For a projectile on a flat trajectory (w0 small), the projection of the position 
vector on the horizontal plane 0 x y grows at a constant rate and turns at a constant rate -Q sin .A; this means a deviation to the right in the northern hemisphere, and to the left in the southern hemisphere (FEREL's law). 
43. FouCAULT's pendulum1• A particle of mass m is attached by a light string 
of length l to the point (0, 0, l) (cf. Fig. 12). Then 0 is a position of equilibrium, 
and, when disturbed, the particle moves according to (42.5), in which 
X=-!_5 l ' 
Y=-1'5 
l ' 
l- z Z=--·5 l ' (43.1) 
1 Cf. APPELL [2] II, pp. 293 -296; SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], pp. 408-411. 
56 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 44. 
where S is the tension in the string. For small disturbances, z is small of the 
second order, and we have 
S =Z = mg- 2m!! cos A ·:Y (43.2) 
by the last of (42.5); the other two equations give 
x - 2!! sin A · y + p2 x = 0, } 
y + 2!! sin A · x + p2 y = 0, 
where P2 =gfl. Introducing C=x+iy, we write the pair of equations as 
C + 2i!JsinAC + P2C= 0, 
and the solution of this is (neglecting !!2) 
C = (A eiPt + B e-iPt) e-iDt sin;.. 
(43-3) 
(43.4) 
(43.5) 
The first factor on the right represents motion in a fixed central ellipse; the 
effect of the second factor is to make this ellipse rotate with angular velocity 
- Q sin A, which is clockwise in the northern hemisphere and counterclockwise 
in the southern hemisphere. 
This FoucAULT rotation must not be confused with the areal effect for a 
spherical pendulum (Sect. 39). If the pendulum is started from a position of 
rest (by burning a supporting thread), the orbit would be a straight line if the 
earth were not rotating. Actually, it is elliptical, and the areal angular velocity is 
}ex2!J sin A, 
where ex is the initial angular amplitude. Since ex is small, this is much less than 
the FOUCAULT rotation. 
D. Dynamics of systems of particles and of rigid bodies. 
I. Equations of motion. 
44. Principles of linear and angular momentum. Consider a system of P particles with masses mi (i = 1, 2, ... P) and position vectors ri relative to an origin 
fixed in absolute space 50 • On these particles there act forces F;, which we split 
into external forces F;' and internal forces F;" as in Sect. 26. The equations of 
motion of the several particles are 
p 
Since 2: F;" = 0, we deduce 
t=l 
where 
p 
M = 2: m;r;, 
i=l 
(44.1) 
(44.2) 
(44.3) 
these being respectively the total linear momentum (Sect. 23) and the total 
external force (Sect. 26). Eq. (44.2) embodies the principle of linear momentum: 
the rate of charge of linear momentum equals the total external force. 
We can also write (44.2) in the form 
ma=F, (44.4) 
where m is the total mass of the system and a the acceleration of the mass-centre. 
Sect. 45. D' ALEMBERT'S principle, Energy. 
p 
Since L r,xF;' = 0, (44.1) also gives i=l 
where 
p 
h = L m;r;XT;, i=l 
p 
G = L1';XF(, 
i=l 
57 
(44.5) 
(44.6) 
these being respectively the total angular momentum of the absolute motion 
about the origin, and the total moment of external force about the origin. Hence 
we have the principle of angular momentum in its first form: the rate of change 
of angular momentum about a fixed point equals the total moment of external force 
about that point. 
Using (24.11), we easily deduce from (44.4) and (44.5) the equation 
h* = G*, (44.7) 
where h* is the angular momentum about the mass-centre 0* of the motion relative to 0*, and G* is the total moment of external force about 0*. This expresses 
the principle of angular momentum in its second form, the mass-centre taking 
the place of the fixed point. 
The essence of the above work is the elimination of internal forces by means 
of NEWTON's Third Law1 . The principles of linear and angular momentum hold 
for any Newtonian system. We can of course replace absolute space S0 by any 
Newtonian frame Sin uniform motion relative to S0 (cf. Sect. 32). 
45. o' ALEMBERT's principle. Energy. Let !5r; (i = 1, ... P) be any set of 
infinitesimal vectors. By (44.1) we have 
p p 
L m;r;· !5r, = L F.· !5r, = !5W, (45.1) 
i=l i=l 
where !5W is the work done by the forces F. in the displacements !5r,. These displacements are called virtual to distinguish them from the displacements actually 
occurring in the motion, viz. dr;=r,dt. 
To assimilate (45.1) to the principle of virtual work in statics, the vectors m/r; 
are called effective forces and these vectors reversed, viz. - m, r,, are called reversed 
effective forces or forces of inertia. Then (45.1) may be stated in either of the two 
following forms (n' ALEMBERT's principle): 
(i) In any virtual displacement, the work done by the effective forces is equal 
to the work done by the actual forces. 
(ii) In any virtual displacement, the total work done by the forces of inertia and 
the actual forces is zero. 
The importance of n'ALEMBERT's principle lies in two facts: (a) A set of 
vector equations (44.1) is replaced by a single scalar equation; (b) !5W involves 
only those forces which do work in the displacements !5r,. Hence, if the system 
has workless constraints (Sect. 26) and the displacements are consistent with them, 
the forces of constraint are not involved. 
The principles of linear and angular momentum (Sect. 44) eliminate internal 
forces; n'ALEMBERT's principle eliminates workless reactions of constraint2. 
1 Cf. Sect. 26. The axiom of homogeneity and isotropy of space (Sect. 5) would not suffice. 2 For a discussion of D' ALEMBERT'S principle, see APPELL [2] II, p. 303, and LANCZOS [15], 
p. 92. For applications to servo-mechanisms (asservissements). see APPELL [2] II, p. 403. 
58 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 46. 
If we take the virtual displacements br, to be the actual displacements occurring in the motion (br,=i-;dt), then (45.1) gives 
p p • 
L m, T; . r; = L F. . r; = w' (45.2) i~l ;~1 
where W is the rate of working (or activity) of the forces; equivalently 
T=W, (45.3) 
where T is the kinetic energy. The rate of increase of kinetic energy is equal to 
the rate of working of the force acting on the system; all working forces, external 
and internal, are to be included. 
If the system is scleronomic, and a potential function V exists [cf. (29.9)], 
then (45.3) leads to the equation of energy or integral of energy 
T+ V = const. (45.4) 
This fundamental equation will be derived again in Sect. 46, with a more general 
form in (46.21). 
46. LAGRANGE's equations. Ignorable coordinates. rr..) General theory. Consider a system of P particles, as in Sects. 44 and 45, subject to constraints which, 
in general, we suppose to be rheonomic and non-holonomic. Let qe (e = 1, ... N) 
be generalized coordinates, so that the position vectors of the particles may be 
written 
r,=r;(q,t) (i=1, ... P); 
let the equations of constraint be, as in (28.2), 
N 
LAcedqe+Acdt=O (c=1, ... M), e~l 
the coefficients being given functions of the N + 1 variables (q, t). 
The velocities of the particles are 
(46.1) 
(46.2) 
• N 0'1'; • 0'1'; . r;= .l>aq-qe+ Tt (t = 1, ... P), (46.3) e~l e 
so that the components of velocity are functions of the 2N + 1 variables (q, q, t). 
For the partial derivatives of these functions, we have 
oi-; or; 
otie aq;;, or; d or; (. P. N) -8-=dt-8- t=1, ... ,(2=1, ... ' q(! q(! 
as is easily verified. The kinetic energy is 
p 
T= i L m;r;· r;, i~l 
a function of (q, q, t), and its partial derivatives are 
(46.4) 
(46.5) 
(46.6) 
Sect. 46. LAGRANGE's equations. Ignorable coordinates. 59 
Hence, by (46.4), p 
!_ oT -~ = "1\'m.r·· .. oT; ( ) d "' " L...J ,, " e=1, ... N. t uq e uqe i=l uqe 
(46.7) 
Let ~q~ (e = 1, ... , N) be an arbitrary set of infinitesimals, and let ~ri be 
corresponding displacements of the particles of the system, obtained by differentiating (46.1) with t held fixed, so that 
(46.8) 
(46.9) 
Note that this is a purely kinematical result, no forces or equations of motion 
having been used; nor have the equations of constraint (46.2) been involved. 
We now introduce the generalized force Q:. split into two parts as in (29.6): 
Q:=Qe+Q~ (e=1, ... N), (46.10) 
where Q~ is the given (or applied) force, and Q~ the force of constraint. We assume 
the constraint workless, in the sense that 
for all values of ~qe satisfying 
N 
LAce ~qe = 0 (c = 1, ... M). e=l 
(46.11) 
(46.12) 
We tum now to n'ALEMBERT's principle (45.1). Choose any ~qe satisfying 
(46.12), and let ~r; be the corresponding displacements as in (46.8). We use 
(46.9) to change the first term in (45.1), and for the last term we have 
(46.13) 
in view of (46.11). Thus (45.1) gives 
~ ( d oT oT ) L...J dt aq-aq- Qe ~qe = O, 
e=l e e 
(46.14) 
for all ~qQ satisfying (46.12). 
From this last equation we obtain at once LAGRANGE's equations of motion 
for non-holonomic systems: 
d oT oT ~ diaq-aq=Qe+L..J#cAc~ (e=1, ... N) e e c=l 
(46.15) 
where De are undetermined multipliers. These equations are to be supplemented 
by the equations of constraint (46.2) in the form 
N 
LAce qe + Ac = 0 (c = 1, ... M), (46.16) 
e=l 
so that we have in all N +M equations for theN +M quantities (q1
l' #c). 
60 ]. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 46. 
We can write down the Eqs. (46.15) explicitly for any given system as soon 
as we given the form of the function T and the forms of the functions Q11 ; these 
last are most easily obtained in practice by calculating the work {J W and using 
(46.13). 
{3) Holonomic systems. For a holonomic system we can takeN to be the smallest 
possible number of generalized coordinates. The #-terms disappear from (46.15), 
and we have LAGRANGE's equations of motion for a holonomic system: 
(46.17) 
But even though the system be holonomic, it is sometimes convenient to 
use more than the minimum number of coordinates; then the equations of motion 
are as in (46.15), supplemented with (integrable) equations of the form (46.16). 
If a holonomic system possesses a potential function V as in (29.9) (in other 
words, a potential energy), or an extended potential function as in (29.11}, the 
equations of motion (46.17) may be written 
d oL oL di a--- a-= o (e = 1, ... N), qe qe (46.18} 
where 
L=T-V. (46.19) 
Here L is a function of the 2 N + 1 variables (q, q, t) ; it is called the Lagrangian 
function, or the kinetic potential. The peculiar virtue of (46.18) is that the equations of motion of a system can be written down once a single function is given. 
Also, if two different physical systems have Lagrangian functions of the same 
form, then they behave in the same way, 
If we multiply (46.18} by q11 and sum with respect to (J, the result may be 
rearranged to read 
d ( ~. oL ) oL di L..Jqlly--L +ae=O. 
11=1 qe 
(46.20} 
If L does not depend explicitly on t (and this may happen even for a rheonomic 
system), we have 8Lf8t=O; in that case (46.20) gives 
a constant. 
N • oL 
Lqey--L=K, 
e=l qe 
(46.21) 
The kinetic energy is quadratic in the generalized velocities (q11}, and we may 
write it 
T= I;+ 7;. +To. (46.22) 
where the subscripts indicate degrees of homogeneity in the generalized velocities. 
If V = V(q), an ordinary potential function, application of EULER's theorem 
for homogeneous functions to (46.21} gives 
(46.23) 
If, further, the system is scleronomic, we have T= T2 , and (46.23) becomes 
T+V=K, (46.24) 
the equation of energy or integral of energy, as in (45.4). 
Sect. 46. LAGRANGE's equations. Ignorable coordinates. 61 
y) Ignorable coordinates. Consider a holonomic system with Lagrangian L. 
If some one coordinate qe is absent from L, that coordinate is said to be ignorable1, 
and the process described below is called the ignoration of coordinates. 
If qe is ignorable, then the corresponding Lagrangian equation of motion 
(46.18) gives 
(46.25) 
a constant. This is a first integral of the equations of motion. If q1 , ..• , qM 
are ignorable coordinates, there are M integrals like (46.25). Solving these 
equations, we obtain the velocities corresponding to the ignorable coordinates 
(that is, q1 , ... qM) as functions of the other coordinates and velocities, of the 
time t, and of the constants c1 , ... eM. The Routhian function R, defined as 
M M 
R=L- Lqe :~ =L- 'L,qPcP, e=l qe p=l 
(46.26) 
can be expressed in the form 
R = R(qM+l• ... qN, t, qM+l• ... qN, c1 , ••• eM). (46.27) 
This function, as we shall now show, may be used to replace Lin the equations 
of motion. 
Since the dynamical system may be thought of in any configuration at any 
time with any generalized velocities, the 2N -M + 1 quantities 
(46.28) 
may be regarded as independently variable; equivalently, the 2N -M + 1 
quantities 
(46.29) 
are independently variable. On applying such a variation, we get from (46.27) 
and (46.26), with (46.25), 
(46.30) 
Therefore, treating the variations of the quantities (46.29) as independent, we 
have 
i:JR i:JL i:JR i:JL (e =M + 1, ... N) (46.31) i:Jqe i:Jqp ' i:Jqe i:Jqe 
and 
i:JR i:JL i:JR 
Tt=Tt· -a~;-= -q~~ (e = 1, ... M). (46.32) (/ 
1 The words kinosthenic and cyclic are also used, particularly the latter, which is a pity, 
because cyclic may be needed in a topological sense; cf. Sect. 63. The word ignorable has 
been used in different senses: (i} absent from T, and (ii} absent from L; cf. GoLDSTEIN [7) 
p. 48; LANCZOS [15], p. 125. 
62 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 47. 
Substituting from (46.31) in LAGRANGE's equations (46.18), we get equations 
of motion in the form 
d oR oR a~- 8 - = o (e = M + 1 .... N). t q(/ qll (46.33) 
The only unknowns in these equations are theN-M non-ignorable coordinates q11 • 
The equations contain the constants c1 , •.. , eM. The original equations (46.18), 
being N equations of the second order, formed a system of differential equations 
of order 2N; in (46.J3) we have a system of order 2N -2M, the Lagrangian 
form being preserved, with R in place of L. The passage from (46.18) to (46.33) 
is the process of ignoration of coordinates. 
If (46.33) have been solved for the non-ignorable coordinates, the ignorable 
coordinates are given by f oR 
q11 =- ac;;dt (e=1, ... M). (46.34) 
47. HAMILTON's equations. Consider any system with N degrees of freedom 
for which the motion is given by the Lagrangian equations (46.18), L being any 
function of the generalized coordinates q11 , their derivatives q11 , and the time t. 
Define the generalized momenta Pe by 
oL Pe =---,-.---- (e = 1, ... N). r..·q2 (47.1) 
If 
(47.2) 
as is in general the case, (47.1) can be solved for the generalized velocities, so 
that we have 
(47.3) 
Then L can be expressed as a function of the 2N + 1 variables (q, t, p), and so 
also can the Hamiltonian function H defined by 
N 
H(q, t, p) = ~ P11 q11 - L. (47.4) 
e=l 
We now regard the 2N + 1 quantities (q, t, p) as independently variable, the 
generalized velocities being expressed in terms of them by (47.3). For an arbitrary variation we have 
all summations running 1, ... , N. By (47.1} the second and third summations 
on the right cancel, and we obtain the equations 
:~ =qe, .:~ =- :~. ~ =- ~~ (e = 1, ... N). (47.6) 
On making use of (47.1), we can now write the Lagrangian equations (46.18) 
in the form 
• oH Pe = - oqll (e = 1, ... N). (47.7) 
Sect. 48. APPELL's equations. 63 
These are HAMILTON's equations of motion; they are also called canonical equations. The passage from LAGRANGE's equations to HAMILTON's is a purely mathematical process, without reference to the original dynamical system; thus 
HAMILTON's equations hold for any system provided LAGRANGE's equations hold 
in the form (46.18); in particular, (47.7) are the equations of motion of any 
holonomic system (rheonomic or scleronomic), provided a potential function V, 
or an extended potential, exists. 
For the rate of change of H we have, using (47.7). 
• N ( oH • oH • ) oH oH 
H= L aqqe+ -apPe + Tt = ae· e=l e e 
Thus, if H does not involve t explicitly, so that oHjot = 0, we have 
H = const, 
(47.8) 
(47.9) 
which may be called an integral of energy. If T = T2 +I;.+ T0 as in (46.22), 
and V = V(q), then N 
H = Ltle :L - L = T2 - T0 + V, (47.10) e=l qQ 
and if T = T2 (the case most commonly encountered in dynamics), then 
H=T+V. (47.11) 
so that in this case H is the total energy of the system, kinetic and potential. 
If, in addition to the forces taken care of by the potential function V (or the 
extended potential), forces Qe act on the system, the Lagrangian equations 
(46.18) are modified to read 
a oL oL --.-- - = Qe (n = 1, ... N). dt eqe oqe 0: (47.12) 
To convert these into Hamiltonian form, we note that (47.6) were obtained by 
purely mathematical manipulations, without reference to the equations of motion, and they are valid in the present case. It follows that the Hamiltonian 
equations (47.7) are modified to read 
. oH . oH Q ( N) qe = ape , Pe =- 8qe + e e = 1,... . (47.13) 
48. APPELL's equations 1. For a system of P particles, the energy of acceleration 
is defined as P 
S 1'\' .. .. (8) = 2 L. m r, · r,, 4 .1 i=l 
accelerations replacing velocities in the definition of kinetic energy. If qe ((} = 
1, ... N) are generalized coordinates so that r,=r; (q, t), then 
(48.2) 
1 Cf. P. APPELL: Sur une forme generate des equations de la dynamique. Paris: GauthierVillars 1925; APPELL [2] II, pp.388, 412, 498; NoRDHEIM [18], p.69; PERES [20], p.219. 
64 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 48. 
We can therefore write 
S = S(q,q,ij, t). (48.3) 
This function of 3 N + 1 quantities is APPELL's function; it is quadratic in the 
second derivatives iju, and its partial derivative with respect to one of them is 
[ cf. ( 46.7) J 
(48.4) 
Thus, if the system is holonomic and the q's form a system of coordinates of 
minimum number, LAGRANGE's equations (46.18) lead at once to APPELL's equations of motion 
(48. 5) 
Suppose now that constraints, in general non-holonomic, are imposed by the 
equations N 
LAced%+ Acdt = 0 (c = 1, ... M) (48.6) 
e=l 
as in (46.2), so that LAGRANGE's equations take the form (46.15). Using the 
purely kinematical result (48.4), we can express (46.14) as follows: 
for all <5qu satisfying 
By (48.6) we have 
N 85 N L F·- <5qe = L Qe 15 %, e=l qe e=1 
N 2.: Ace <5qe = 0 (c = 1, ... M). 
e=l 
N 
LAcufJe+Ac=O (c=1, ... M), 
e=l 
and hence, differentiating with respect to t, 
N 
L Aceiie + Bc(q, q, t) = 0 (c = 1, ... M), 
e=l 
(48.7) 
(48.8) 
(48.9) 
(48.10) 
Be being a function of the 2N + 1 variables indicated. These last equations 
may be used to express ijl> ... ijM in terms of the 3 N- M + 1 quantities 
and so we can write 
S(ql, ... qN, ql, ... fJN, ijl, ... ijN, t) } 
= S(ql, ... qN, ql, ... qN, ijM+l' ... ijN, t). 
If we give variations bij1 , ••• , bijN, arbitrary except for the conditions 
N 
2.: Ace bije = 0 (c = 1, ... M), e=l 
it follows from (48.10) and (48.11) that 
N N -
"' 85 (j •• "' 85 (j •• L. Y qe= L. -~ q,. e=l qe r=M+l q, 
(48.11) 
(48.12) 
(48.13) 
Sect. 49. Equations of motion of a rigid body. 
This is equivalent to saying that 
N 85 N 8S 2.: a··- IJqQ = 2.: 8"' IJq, e~l qQ r~M+l q, 
for all variations /Jq1 , ... , 1Jq1 .. ,- which satisfy 
N 
LAce IJqe = 0 (c = 1, ... M). e~l 
We now define Q M +1, ... Q N by the condition that 
N N 
l: Qe 1Jqe = l: Q,bq, e~l r~M+l 
65 
(48.14) 
(48.15) 
(48.16) 
for all variations satisfying (48.15). Then, by (48.14) and (48.16), we may write 
(48.7) in the form 
and since these variations are arbitrary, we have 
as - ~-- = Q r(r = M + 1 , ... N) , vq, 
(48.17) 
(48.18) 
which are APPELL's equations of motion in a form valid for non-holonomic 
systems1. 
49. Equations of motion of a rigid body. Consider a rigid body of mass m with 
mass-centre 0 and principal moments of inertia A, B, Cat 0. The four numbers 
m, A, B, C specify the body dynamically. 
Let q1 , q2 , q3 be generalized coordinates describing the position of 0 in absolute space 50 , and let q~, q;, q~ be generalized coordinates describing the position of the body relative to 0, i.e. specifying the directions of principal axes fixed 
in the body relative to axes fixed in space. By the theorem of KoNIG (Sect. 2;), 
the kinetic energy of the body may be written 
(49.1) 
where T0 is the kinetic energy of a particle of mass m moving with 0, and T' is 
the kinetic energy of the motion relative to 0; these functions are of the forms 
3 3 
T: ,_, ( ) . q' T' " ' ( ') . ' . ' 0 = LJ aQ" q qe "' = LJ aea q qeqa. p,a=l p,a=l 
(49.2) 
If the coordinates q are rectangular Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z), we have 
T0 = fm(x 2 + y2 + z2 ), (49-3) 
and if the coordinates q' are the Eulerian angles ({}, rp, 'If), we have, as in (25.5), 
T' = fA ( J sin 'If - cp sin {} cos 'If) 2 + f B ( {} cos 'If + cp sin {} sin 'If) 2 + 
+ i- c (ip + cp cos {}) 2• 
} (49.4) 
In the case of axial symmetry (A= B), this simplifies to 
T' = fA (g,2 + cp 2 sin2 {}) + f C (ip + cp cos {})2. (49.5) 
I For the application of these equations to servo-mechanisms (asservissements), see APPELL [2] II, pp. 412-416. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. lll/1. 
66 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 49. 
Let Q2 , Q~ (e = 1, 2, 3) be generalized forces such that the work done in an 
arbitrary displacement is 3 3 
6W= 2; Qe6qe + 2: Q~6q~. (49.6) e ~I e~I 
We have then the six Lagrangian equations of motion, as in (46.17), 
~~ :~!-~~~ = Qe, l 
!:_oT'- oT'- , (e=1,2,3). 
dt"''' ,,-Qe oq e uqe 
(49.7) 
The coordinates q are separated from the coordinates q' on the left hand sides, 
but this separation does not, in general, extend to the right hand sides; in other 
words, the problem of the motion of a rigid body does not, in general, split into 
two problems. 
These Lagrangian equations hold for a rigid body without constraint. They 
hold also in the case of constraints, provided we include in Qe and Q~ contributions from the forces of constraint. 
In discussing the motion of a rigid body, it is often more convenient to use 
the principles of linear and angular momentum instead of LAGRANGE's equations. 
By (44.4) and (44.7) (dropping the asterisks), we have the two vector equations 
ma=F, 
h=G, 
where 
a = acceleration of the mass-centre 0, 
h =angular momentum about 0 of the motion relative to 0, 
F = total external force, 
G =total moment of external force about 0. 
(49.8) 
(49.9) 
In order to use these equations for the determination of the motion, we have 
to resolve them into components along some orthonormal triad; we can choose 
a triad fixed in absolute space, a triad fixed in the body, or neither of these. 
We shall later consider a triad fixed in absolute space; for practical purposes 
it is best to choose a moving triad which is a principal triad of inertia for the 
body. 
But let us start by taking any arbitrary orthonormal triad (i,j, k), rotating 
with angular velocity .2. Resolving along this triad, we have 
h= ~+h j. + h3 k,) 
G = G1 t + G21 + G3 k, 
.Q =!2ri +!2d +!23k. 
Then, by (20.3), we can write (49.9) in the form 
(jh Tt+.2xh=G, 
or. explicitly, 
h1-h2!23+h3!22=G1, l 
h2- h3!21 + hrD3= G2, 
h3- h1!22 + h2!21 = G3. 
(49.10) 
(49.11) 
(49.12) 
Sect. 49. Equations of motion of a rigid body. 67 
Let us now choose (i,j, k) be a principal triad of inertia at 0, the corresponding moments of inertia being A, B, C. If w is the angular velocity of the body, 
we have then, by (24.14), 
W = Oh i + W 2 j + Wa k, } (49.13) h =A w1 i + B w2 j + C w3 k. 
There are three cases to consider. 
rx) Unsymmetrical body (A, B, and C all different). In this case the triad 
(i,j, k), if it is to be principal, must be fixed in the body. Therefore .2= w, 
and (49.12) with (49.13) give us EuLER's equations of motion for a rigid body 
A 1 - ( B - C) w2 wa: G1 , l 
B w2 - (C- A) Waw1 - G2 , (49.14) 
C wa- (A - B) w1 w2 = Ga. 
{J) Body with axis of symmetry(A=B=f=C). Now (49.14) simplify to 
A (A - C) w2 wa: G1 , l 
A w2 - (C- A) w3 w1 - G2 , 
Cwa= Ga. 
(49.15) 
But we are no longer compelled to fix (i,j, k) in the body in order to have a 
principal triad; it is sufficient to fix k in the body. Doing this, we have 
Da remaining arbitrary, and (49.12) becomes 
Aw1 -Aw2 Da + Cwaw2 = G1 , l 
Aw2 +Aw1 Da- Cwaw1 = G2 , 
Cw3 =Ga. 
The first two equations may be exhibited in complex form 1 : 
Aw+(AQa-Cwa)iw=F,} 
w = w1 + i w2 , F = G1 + i G2 . 
(49.16) 
(49.17) 
(49.18) 
y) Body with spherical symmetry (A =B=C). Now (49.14) simplify to 
(49.19) 
for axes fixed in the body. In this case we can choose .2 arbitrarily; if we choose 
.2=0, (49.12) gives (49.19), but with the components taken on axes with directions fixed in space. 
Returning to the motion of the mass-centre as given by (49.8), we may use 
a moving triad (i,j, k) here also. Let v be the absolute velocity of 0, and let it 
and F be resolved along the triad, so that we have 
v = v1 ~ + ~ + v3 k, } 
F = 1\ t + F;J +Fa k. (49.20) 
1 Useful in ballistics and other problems of stability; cf. K. L. NIELSEN and J. L. SYNGE: 
Quart. Appl. Math. 4, 201 ( 1946); E. J. McSHANE, J. L. KELLEY and F. V. RENO: Exterior 
Ballistics, p. 176 (Denver: University Press 1953); S. O'BRIEN and J. L. SYNGE: Proc. Roy. 
Irish Acad. A 56, 23 (1954). The complex notation is also useful in the theory of KOWALEWSKI's 
top (Sect. 56). 
5* 
68 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
Then {49.8) may be written 
or, explicitly, 
m ( ~: +~X v) = F, 
m(v1 - D3 v2 + D2 v3) = }\, l 
m(v2 - D1 v3 + D3 v1) = ~. 
m(v3 -D2 v1 +D1 v2) =Fa. 
Sect. SO. 
(49.21) 
(49.22) 
In Case IX, we put ~=w. Then we have in {49.14) and (49.22) six equations 
for the six components of v and w. When these have been found as functions 
of t, the complete determination of the motion demands a further step. Assigning 
six generalized coordinates (q) to the body, we express the six components of v 
and w as functions of (q, q); then, v and w being known, we have six differential 
equations of the first order to determine (q) as functions of t, and so complete 
the description of the motion. 
Cases {J andy are treated similarly. In Casey we may put ~=0, and then 
(49.22) read 
(49.23) 
The important case of a rigid body turning about a fixed point (see Sect. 55-57) 
is covered by the preceding theory. The body has three degrees of freedom, and 
its motion is determined by (44.5), which is formally identical with (49.9). But 
now h is the angular momentum about the fixed point, and G the total moment 
of forces about that point. With this change of interpretation, all the work from 
(49.10) to (49.19), inclusive, is applicable; but now A, B, Care prin-cipal moments 
of inertia at the fixed point, and not at the mass-centre. 
In the case of a freely moving rigid body, explicit reference to the mass-centre 
is avoided in the motor symbolism (Motorrechnung) of STUDY and VON MISEs1. 
50. Moving frames of reference 2• Let S be a rigid body in some quite general 
prescribed motion. We take S as a frame of reference, and seek the equations of 
motion of a dynamical system relative to this frame. In Sect. 32 we treated this 
question for a single particle; now we take a dynamical system consisting of P 
particles, with scleronomic holonomic constraints, so that there exist generalized 
coordinates qe (e = 1, ... N) determining the configuration of the system relative 
to S, these coordinates being freely variable without violation of the constraints. 
For example, S might be the earth, having an orbital motion around the sun 
and also a rotation about its axis; the system might be a rigid body having one 
point attached to the earth; qe might be the three Eulerian angles relative to a 
triad fixed on the earth. 
The plan is to reduce S to a Newtonian frame by the introduction of fictitious 
forces. As in (32.1), the equations of motion of the particles may be written 
(50.1) 
here F; is the total real force on the particle (applied force+ reaction of constraint), 
and the other three vectors on the right hand side are as in (32.2), but with a 
suffix i attached tom, r', v'. Let IJqe be an arbitrary variation of the generalized 
coordinates, and let IJr~ be the corresponding displacements of the particles 
1 R. VON MISES: Z. angew. Math. Mech. 4, 155, 193 (1924). -FRANK [5] pp. 98-102. -
C. B. BIEZENO: Handbuch der Physik, Vol. 5. pp. 247-250. Springer: Berlin 1927. -
WINKELMANN and GRAMMEL [29] pp. 373-378. - L. B:RAND, Chap. II of op. cit. in 
Sect. 12. - W. RAHER: Ost. Ing.-Arch. 9, 55 (1954). 
2 For alternative methods of treating relativ~ motion, see APPELL [2] II, pp. 360-376. 
Sect. 51. Two-body problem. 69 
relative to S. Taking the scalar product of (50.1) by or; and summing fori from 
toP, we get 
p p p p p 
l: m; a:. or;= l: Iii. or;+ l: F,;. or;+ l: F,;. or;+ l: F;;. or;. (50.1 a) 
Since a; is the acceleration of the particle relative to S, by the purely kinematical 
formula (46.9) we have 
P I I N ( d oT1 oT') L m;a;. Or;= L 7iJ oq - Bq- oqQ, 
i=1 e=l (! e 
(50.2) 
where T'(q, q) is the kinetic energy of the motion relative to S, i.e. 
p p 
T l ( ") _ 1 "' " I " I _ 1 "' 12 q,q -2L.Jm;r;·r;- 2 L.Jm;V;. (50. 3) i=l i=l 
To deal with the other summations in (50.1 a), we first define generalized forces Q0 
by P N 
l:lii ·or:= 2: Qe oqe, (50.4) 
i=l e=l 
this being the work done by the applied forces, the frame S being held fixed 
during the virtual displacement; the reactions of constraint do not appear in Qv. 
Next we define A0 , B0 , C2 (e = 1, .. . N) by the equations. [cf. (32.2)] 
p p N 
l:F,;· or;=- l: m;ao. or;= L Aeo%, 
i=l i=1 e=l 
p P N 
l:F;,;. or;=- 2 L m,(wxv;). or;= L Be oqe, i=l i=l e=l 
p p p (50.5) 
L 11;; · b r; = - L m; ( c.O X r;) · or; - w · L m; ( w · r;) or; + i=l i=l i=l 
P N 
+ w2 2: m;r;. or; = 2: ca oqe, i=l e=l 
the variations bq0 being arbitrary. In these expressions a 0 and ware respectively 
the acceleration of the base-point 0 (fixed in S), and the angular velocity of S; 
they are given functions of t (since the motion of S is prescribed), and hence A0 
and C0 are functions of (q, t), while Be is a function of (q, q, t). 
After these preparations, we can use (50.1 a) to obtain at once LAGRANGE's 
equations for the motion relative to S in the form 
(50.6) 
the last three terms being fictitious generalized forces due to the motion of S. 
II. Systems without constraints. 
51. Two-body problem. Consider two particles with masses m1 , m2 , attracting or repelling one another with equal and opposite forces acting along the 
line joining the particles and depending only on the distance between them. 
Fig. 13 shows the case of repulsion. 
70 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 51. 
Let r 1 , r 2 be the position vectors of the particles relative to some fixed origin; 
let P be the force exerted by the first particle on the second. Then the equations 
of motion are 
(51.1) 
The position vector of the second particle relative to the first is 
(51.2) 
and from (51.1) we obtain 
Mr=P, (51. 3) 
Thus, by abandoning the absolute frame of reference, and using an accelerated 
frame attached to the first particle, we reduce the two-body problem to the oneP body problem, the mass of the second particle 
being fictitiously changed 1 in this process, 
but the force being unchanged. We can now 
apply to (51-3) the theory of central forces 
as developed in Sect. 37. But note that in 
(3 7.1) F is force per unit mass; in using 
-P (37.1) we are to put F=P/M, where !PI is 
0 
Fig. 13. Two-body problem. 
the magnitude of P and P is positive for 
repulsion and negative for attraction; for 
the potential V of (37-3) we have 
, V= -M-1 f Pdr. (51.4) ,, 
We can also simplify the two-body problem by using a suitable Newtonian 
frame of reference. By (51.1) we have 
(51.5) 
and this tells us that the mass-centre is unaccelerated; a frame in which it is 
at rest is Newtonian. Using this frame, and taking the origin at the mass-centre, 
we have (51.6) 
It is then sufficient to work with only one of the Eq. (51.1). If the scalar law 
of repulsion or attraction is P=P(r), the second of (51.1) may be written 
(51.7) 
Again we have a one-body problem. Now the mass is unchanged, but the law 
of force is altered. In the case of the inverse square law, we have P = kfr2, and 
the motion relative to the mass-centre is given by 
(51.8) 
Viewed in a fixed frame of reference, the orbits of the two particles are twisted 
curves in space. It is much easier to study the motion in a moving frame, attached 
either to one particle as in (51.3), or to the mass-centre as in (51.7), for then 
the orbits are plane. 
Note that the assumption regarding the interaction between the particles 
rules out magnetic interaction and electromagnetic retarded effects. 
1 The quantity Min (51.3) is called the reduced mass. 
Sect. 52. Capture and scattering. 71 
52. Capture and scattering1• Consider two particles which interact as in Sect. 51, 
the scalar force between them at distance r being P (r), positive for repulsion 
and negative for attraction. We suppose that for large r this force goes to zero 
at least as fast as r 1-'(e > 0), so that the potential V exists as in (51.4) with 
r0 = oo. Fort=- oo the particles are infinitely distant from one another. They 
approach and interact. We are interested in the result of the encounter, i.e. the 
state of affairs at t = + oo. 
If r--+0 as t-+ oo, or more generally if r is bounded as t-+ oo, we have capture. 
If r-+ oo as t-+ oo, we have scattering. We wish to determine whether capture 
or scattering occurs in any encounter for which the initial conditions are prescribed, and, in the case of scattering, to find the directions in which the particles are scattered. 
It is advisable to view any particular encounter 
in three frames of reference: 
SM, the mass-centre frame, in which the masscentre is fixed. 
SR, the relative frame, in which the particle m1 
is fixed. 
SL, the laboratory frame, in which the particle m1 
is at rest for t = - oo. 
W=WK 
0 0 
Fig. 14. Diagram showing initia ~state 
before an encounter .. 
We use parallel axes in all three frames. The frames SM and SL are Newtonian, 
but SR is accelerated; however SR is Newtonian for t=- oo, and fort=+ oo 
also if scattering takes place. 
We shall denote initial velocities by v1 , v2 , indicating the frame of reference 
with M, R, or L, as in (v1)M, (v2)R· Then 
mr (vr)M + m2 (v2)M = 0, (vr)R = (vr)L = 0, l 
(v2)R = (v2)L = (v2)u- (vrhr = ( 1 + ::) (v2Lu, (52·
1) 
so that in all three frames v2 has the same direction. 
In SM the initial data provide a pair of infinite parallel lines (the asymptotes of 
the initial trajectories); in SR and SL we have a point (position of m1) and an 
infinite line (the asymptote of the initial trajectory of m2}. A single diagram as 
in Fig.14 serves to display the initial data of a given encounter, no matter which 
frame is used. Here k is a unit vector drawn on the line of v2 . In S R or SL the 
point 0 is the initial position of m1 , and in SM it is any point on the asymptote 
of the initial trajectory of m1 . The vector b is drawn from 0 to meet the line 
of k at right angles. It is the impact vector and its magnitude b is the impact 
parameter or collision parameter; it is in fact the shortest distance between the 
two asymptotes of the initial trajectories, viewed in any unaccelerated frame. 
The relative velocity appears in Fig. 14 as 
w = v2 - v1 = w k; 
it is of course the same for all the frames. 
(52.2) 
1 Cf. CoRBEN and STEHLE [3] pp. 86-90; GoLDSTEIN [7] pp. 81-89; D. BoHM: Quantum Theory, Chap. 21. New York: Prentice-Hall 1951. For details of encounters between 
particles obeying various particular laws of force, between smooth spheres and between 
rough spheres, see S. CHAPMAN and T. G. CowLING: The Mathematical Theory of NonUniform Gases, Chaps. 10, 11. Cambridge: University Press 1952. Cf. also H. GRAD: Comm. 
Pure Appl. Math. 2, 331 (1949) and his article on the kinetic theory of gases in Vol. XII of 
this Encyclopedia. For relativistic capture and scattering by a fixed centre, see J. L. SYNGE: 
Relativity: The Special Theory, p. 426. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co. 1956. 
72 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 52. 
We deal with the encounter primarily in 5 R, passing immediately to results 
in 5 M, and with a little more complication to results in 5L. 
In 5R the particle m1 remains permanently at 0 in Fig. 14 and m2 describes 
an orbit in the plane (b, k). By (37. 5), (51. 3) and (51.4), this orbit is determined 
by (~;f=l(u), l(u)= z(Eh-;_!1_-u2 , (s2.3) 
where 00 
1 
U=-r ' V(u) = m1_±mz J P(Y) dY, mlm2 (52.4) 
(Y, {}) being polar coordinates in the plane of the motion. Here, in terms of the 
initial data, E = iw2 , h = bw. (52.5) 
The time is given by [cf. (37.6)] 
u 
t=-1 f ~--du 
h u2Vf(u) . (52.6) 
ffu_) 
Fig.15. Graphs of f(u): capture for C1 and C,, scattering for 1:. Fig. 16. Capture: r~o as t~ oo. 
The outcome of the encounter depends entirely on the function f (u), i.e. on the 
form of the function V(u), on the masses of the particles, and on the two constants 
(b, w). We have 
(52.7) 
so that the graph of I (u) starts above the u-axis (Fig. 15). If it does not meet 
that axis at all (curve C1), then l(u) >0 for all u, and the orbit spirals in to 0, 
with capture resulting (Fig. 16). If the graph touches the u-axis at u=u0 (C2 in 
Fig. 15), there is an apse with apsidal distance Y = Y0 = 1/u0 ; but this apse is never 
attained, because I (u) contains (u- u0) 2 as a factor and the integral in (52.6) 
diverges; the result of the encounter is capture as shown in Fig. 17. If, finally, 
the graph cuts the u-axis at u=u0 (curve .E in Fig. 15), an apse occurs in finite 
time, and we have scattering as shown in Fig. 18. 
Omitting head-on collisions; for which b = 0, it is clear that capture is impossible 
in the case of a repulsive force, since such a force bends the trajectory away 
from 0. 
Assuming now that scattering takes place (the force being either repulsive 
or attractive), we proceed to calculate the scattering angle XR as shown in Fig. 18, 
which shows also the base line {} = 0, the two asymptotes of the orbit, and the 
apse A at which dufd{} = 0. The apsidal distance is OA = Y0 = 1/u0 and the apsidal 
angle, as shown, is u, 
.,_ =I v~iu) . (52.8) 
0 
Sect. 52. Capture and scattering. 73 
Since the orbit is symmetrical about the apsidalline OA, the scattering angle is 
XR = n- zoc = n- 2j'l;~~u) . 0 
(52.9) 
With the convention as to sign adopted here, we have 0~ XR~ :n; for repulsive 
scattering and - oo <XR~ 0 for attractive scattering. To calculate XR we have 
to evaluate an integral in which the upper limit is given by solving 
.,_0 
Fig. 17. Capture: r-Ho as 1---..oo. 
(52.10) 
Fig. 18. Scattering in the relative frame SR: the angle 
of sea ttering is x R • 
The scattering angle XR is thus a function of the two basic parameters (b, w), 
XR = XR(b, w), (52.11) 
the form of this function depending on the form of the function V(u), obtained 
from the force function P(r) by (52.4). 
Let us denote final velocities with primes. By (51.3) we have in the frame SR 
d ( 1 M' 2) • d.t2.,. =P·r 
and integration gives 
Since 
(t•{)R = (vl)R = 0, 
we have the invariant equation 
w'=w, 
(52.12) 
(52.13) 
(52.14) 
(52.15) 
true for all the frames; the relative speed of the particles is unchanged by the encounter. If we denote by sR a unit vector in the direction of scattering, the final 
velocity may be written 
(52.16) 
74 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 52. 
We pass now to the frames SM and SL. They are Newtonian, and so momentum is conserved in them. Further, relative velocity is invariant under change 
of frame. Hence we have the equations 
m2 (v~)M + m1 (v~)M = 0, ) 
(v;)M- (vl.)M = W' = WSR, l m2 (v~)L + m1 (1'~)L = m2 (v2)L = m2 w, 
(v;)L - (v~)L = W' = W SR, 
(52.17) 
which give the final velocities in the form 
(m1+m2) (v~)M= m1 wsR, 
(m1 + m2) (vi)L m2w- m2 wsR, (52.18) 
(m1+m2 ) (v~)M= -m2w sR, 1 
(m1 +m2) (v;)L = m2w + m1wsR. 
Therefore the unit vectors s M and sL in the 
direction of scattering [i.e. in the directions 
of (v;)M and (v~h- respectively J are 
SM= SR, l m2 k + m1 sR 
SL= 
Vmi+m~+2m k·sR' 
(52.19) 
ll k being, as above, a unit vector in the direction of the initial relative velocity w, which 
is the same direction as that of (v2)L. We 
note that the directions of scattering are the 
same in S R and S M, and that the direction for 
w SL is given in terms of that for SR by (52.19). 
We now construct a spherical represenFig.19. Spherical representation of scattering. tation of scattering (Fig.19), turning Fig. 14 
into three-dimensional form. The vector w 
(initial relative velocity) is assigned, but we consider all impact vectors b perpendicular to it. For diagrammatic convenience we draw bin a displaced plane II, and 
we construct, with centre 0, a unit sphere with spherical polar coordinates (@, q;) 
on it. For given b, the mechanism of scattering gives a unit scattering vector s 
and this appears as a point on the unit sphere. In fad, the scattering maps the plane 
II on the unit sphere; the mapping is the same for S R and S M, but different for SL. 
In the frame SR we have, in accordance with Fig. 18, 
~=~~b+k~b l (52.20) 
= i cos q;0 sin XR + j sin q;0 sin XR + k cos XR, 
where q;0 is the azimuth of b relative to unit vectors i, j, which, with k, make up 
an orthogonal triad; thus the angles (@R, q;R) of sR are given by 
sin eR cos (/!R =sin XR cos (/!o' l 
sin eR sin (/!R =sin XR sin (/!o' 
coseR =cos XR' 
(0;;;;; eR :;:;;- 'll, 0;;;;; TR < 2n). 
(52.21) 
Sect. 52. Capture and scattering. 
For repulsive scattering we have 
@R=XR• cpR = cpo, 
75 
(52.22) 
and for attractive scattering (depending on the value of XR• which can in theory 
take any negative value) one of the following alternatives: 
cpR = cpo, 
cpR = :n; + cpo, 
eR = XR modulo 2:rc, } 
eR =- XR modulo 2:rc. (52.23) 
Having thus obtained the angles (8R, cpR) for sR [the angles (8M, cpM} are the 
same], we get the angles (8L, cpL} for sL from (52.19). We have 
sin @L COS cpL = {J sin (:}R COS cpR, 
sin (:}L sin cpL = {J sin (:}R sin cpR, 
cos eL = fJ ( :~ + cos eR), (52.24) 
Therefore 
cpL = cpR, 
Sin @L = {J Sin @R, ) (52.25) 
The last of these gives 8L uniquely in the range (0, :rc}. We note the following 
formula: 
sin@Rd@R 
sin@Ld@L (52.26) 
Consider encounters with initial elements (b, w) as in Fig. 19, with the relative 
velocity w fixed and the impact vector b variable. We regard bas the position 
vector of a point in the plane II; then to any point in II there corresponds one 
of two results-capture or scattering. We define the total cross section for capture 
to be the area II. of II corresponding to capture; II. may be zero, finite, or 
infinite. 
The mechanism of scattering maps II (except for the area II,) on the unit 
sphere by the scattering vectors s, with one mapping for SM, SR and another 
for SL. We define the differential cross section for scattering into the solid angle 
dQ to be that area dii which is mapped on to the element dQ of the unit sphere. 
If we define a to be the mapping ratio 
dll 
(J = ---- dQ' (52.27) 
the differential cross section is 
ad!J = dii. (52.28} 
We call a the density; it is in fact a relative probability density over the unit 
sphere corresponding to uniform probability density over II. There are of course 
two densities, aM=aR and aL. 
76 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 52. 
It is advisable to divide scattering into two categories: zero-scattering (@ = 0) 
and significant scattering (8 >0). Zero-scattering can occur if, and only if, there 
is a cut-off of interaction, with P(r) =0 for r>r1 , say, so that if b>r1 the two 
particles pass one another with straight trajectories. 
We define the total cross section for scattering to be the area lis of II corresponding to significant scattering; thus 
lis= f adD, (52.29) 
an improper integral over the unit sphere with the point e = 0 excluded. If Ilo 
is the area of II corresponding to zero-scattering, then Ilc+Ils+Ilo is the total 
infinite area of II; consequently at least one of lie, II., Il0 must be infinite. 
The determination of the density a is merely a question of finding the mapping 
ratio as in (52.27). The scattering vector is 
s = i sin e cos cp + j sin e sin cp + k cos e' 
and it traces out the solid angle 
dD = !sin@d@dcp!. 
Hence 
a---- dll I b db dtp0 ! b I db I ----- -- - dD - lsin@d@dtpl - sin@ d@ · 
since dcp0 =dcpR = dcpL. 
(52.30) 
{52.31) 
(52.32) 
In the frame SR we know XR as a function of (b, w) [cf. (52.11)]. Let us solve 
for b as a function of (XR' w) and then substitute XR = eR for repulsive scattering, 
as in (52.22}, and XR= ±8R modulo 2n for attractive scattering, as in (52.23). 
Thus we getl b = b(@R, w). (52-33) 
Then (52.32) gives for the density 
aM= aR = siri~-; I dtR I· (52.34) 
the right hand side being a function of @R and W; in this, as in the other differentiations, w is held fixed. 
For the laboratory frame SL, we get from (52.32) 
(52.35) 
and by (52.26) this may be written 
(52.36) (1 + m: + 2 mz cos@R)~ ml ml =aR--· 
!1 + :: coseRI 
We would like to express aL explicitly as a function of @Land w, but we cannot. 
The best plan is, for given w, to regard (52.25) and (52.36) as expressions for 
eLand aL in terms of the parameter eR. We can however use approximations 
when the mass-ratio m2/m1 is small, for then @L and aL differ little from @R 
and aR. 
1 This can be a multiple valued function in the case of attractive scattering. 
Sect. 52. Capture and scattering. 77 
In view of the symmetry of the mapping about the axis k in Fig. 19, it is 
often convenient to use the dilferential cross section for scattering in the ring 
B, B +dB. This is the area of II which is mapped on to the ring, and its 
value is 
2na sin B I dB! = 2nb I db!. (52.37) 
Here follow details for some special cases of scattering. 
a.) Smooth elastic spheres. A collision between two smooth elastic spheres 
may be regarded as an encounter between two particles with a cut-off at r=D, 
whereD is the sum of radii of spheres; we take V(u)=O foru< 1/D and V(u)-+ oo 
as u-1/D from below. The solution of (52.10) is u0 =1fD, and by (52.9) the 
scattering angle is u, f du . b 
XR = 7l- 2 v--~-- = 7l- 2 arcsin -D • b-2- u2 
0 
Thus b=D cos! XR =D cos! BR, and by (52-34) the density is 
(52.38) 
{52.39) 
which is independent of BR and w. To get av we would use (52.25) and (52.36). 
{3) CoULOMB scattering. Take 
P(r) = .!!_ 
r2 ' V(u) = ku, {52.40) 
(k >0 for repulsion, k <0 for attraction). Then by (52.10) 
1 2k u 2 f(u) = -1)2 - 1)2U,2" - u = (u0 - u) (u + u1), {52.41) 
where 
Uo= b2~2 (-k+ Vk2+b2w4), ul=b2~2 (k+ Vk2+b2w4), (52.42) 
By (52.9) the scattering angle is 
(52.43) 
so that fork >Owe have O<XR<n, and for k<O we have -n<xR<O; thus 
BR=IxiR for both cases. By (52.42) 
and when we substitute this is {52.43) and solve, we get 
b w2 = k cot ! XR = I k I cot ! BR. 
By (52-34) the density is 
aM=a =-,_!1 ___ ,_}b_l=-~cosec4-.!_B. R sm@R o@R 4w4 2 R 
(52.44) 
(52.45) 
{52.46) 
This i<> RuTHERFORD's scattering formula; it holds for both repulsive and attractive CouLOMB fields. For the frame SR the energy of the incident particle at 
infinity is jm2w2• 
78 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 52. 
For the laboratory frame we have, by (52.25) and (52.36), 
(1 + m} + 2 m2 cos@R)1 l m 1 m 1 ; J 
11 + :: cos@RI 
(52.47) 
thus eLand (JL are expressed in terms of the parameter eR. For two particles 
of the same mass, we have m1 =m2 and 
1 fJL= -
2 fJR, 
y) Inverse cube law. Take 
P(r) = ~-, 
(k >0 for repulsion, k <0 for attraction). By (52.10) we have 
t(u) = .L - u2 (-k __ + 1) b2 b2w2 • 
(52.48) 
(52.49) 
(52.50) 
Capture occurs if k <- b2w2• If k exceeds this value, there is scattering at the 
angle 
In the case of repulsion we have eR = XR and 
hence 
~) Inverse fifth power1• Take 
1 P(r) = ~, V(u) = 4 ku4 , r 
We have by (52.10) 
where 
I( ) _ 1 k u' 2 _ k ( 2 2) ( 2 + 2) U-bZ-2b2w2-U-2b2w2Uo-U u ul 
u~= ~ (- b2w+ Vb4w2+ 2k), ) 
u~ = ~ (b2w + Vb4w2 + 2k). 
(52.51) 
(52.52) 
(52.53) 
(52.54) 
(52.55) 
(52.56) 
1 Repulsion varying inversely as the fifth power of the distance is of importance in the 
kinetic theory of gases; cf. CHAPMAN and CowLING (op. cit. in preceding footnote) pp. 170 to 
174, where a force varying as any power of r is discussed. 
Sect. 53. n-body problem. 79 
The scattering angle is given by the elliptic integral 
(52.57) 
53. n-body problem. The n-body problem is concerned with the motion of 
n particles which attract one another gravitationally according to the law of 
the inverse square. If m; (i = 1, ... n) are the masses of the particles, r; their 
position vectors, and r;i= -ri;=r;-r;, then the equations of motion are 
(i = 1, ... n), (53.1) 
where G is the gravitational constant. 
The system has three integrals of linear momentum and three integrals of 
angular momentum, contained in the vector formulae 
£ m,r, = M = const, l 
£ ~~:i X r; = h = const. i~l 
There is also the integral of energy: 
where 
T + V = E = const, 
1 n • • 
T = 2 L mi r; . r;, 
i=l 
n V = _ ~ Gm;m;. 
.L.J r .. i,i=t '1 
j>i 
(53.2) 
(53.3) 
(53.4) 
The velocity of the mass-centre is constant, and we can, if we wish, use a frame 
of reference in which the mass-centre is permanently at rest. 
Seven integrals of linear momentum, angular momentum, and energy exist 
also if the forces are of a more general type, provided they act in equal opposite 
pairs along the lines joining the particles and depend only on the mutual distances. 
The inverse square law is, however, definitely involved in jACOBI's equation, 
which reads 
where 
d2 ,p --=2T+V dt2 ' 
n 
if>= i L: m,r;. i~l 
(53.5) 
(53 .6) 
This rather striking result is most easily proved1 by applying HAMILTON's equations of motion (Sect. 47) to any system with N degrees of freedom having a 
Hamiltonian of the form H(q, p) = T(p) + V(q), (53.7) 
where T is homogeneous of degree 2 in the generalized momenta (p) and V is 
homogeneous of degree -1 in the generalized coordinates (q); the Hamiltonian 
of the n-body problem is of this form. By virtue of the homogeneities, we have 
NoH 
L-a-qe =- V. 
e=l qe 
(53.8) 
1 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], p. 342, for a different proof. 
80 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 53-
If we define lJI by 
(53.9) 
(53.10) 
This is the general form of jACOBI's equation; in the n-body problem we have 
df/J n • N 
dt= Lm;r;·r;= LPeqe=lJI. 
and (53.10) gives {53-5). 
The quantity 
i~l e~l 
n 
t/>' = _!_ " m; mi r~- 2 L. M '1' i,j~l 
j>i 
(53.11) 
(53.12) 
where M is the total mass of the system, is independent of the frame of reference, 
and it is easy to see that t/>' = t/> when the origin is taken at the mass-centre. 
Hence jACOBI's equation may also be written in the form 
d2 f/J' = 2 T' + V 
dt2 ' (53.13) 
where T is the kinetic energy relative to the mass-centre. 
If n=2, we have the two-body problem (Sect. 51), which is easily solved. 
But for n > 2 the problem is of great mathematical difficulty. The case n = 3 
(three-body problem) has been of particular interest to mathematicians and possesses a vast literature 1. 
In the three-body problem there are 9 coordinates and 9 momenta, and the 
Hamiltonian equations of motion form a system of order 18. By means of the 
integrals (53.2) and (53-3) it is possible, by application of canonical transformations2, to reduce the order from 18 to 63 ; if the particles move in a plane, the 
reduction is from order 12 to order 4. 
Although no general formal solution of the three-body problem is known, 
there exist special solutions known as LAGRANGE's particles 4, in which the configuration is a rigid line or triangle; these motions are as follows: 
(a) The particles remain always on a straight line rotating with an arbitrary 
constant angular velocity, which determines the mutual distances of the particles. 
(b) The triangle formed by the particles remains equilateral and of constant 
size, rotating in its plane with an arbitrary constant angular velocity, which 
determines the size of the triangle. 
1 For modern accounts, see WINTNER [30], Chap. 5, and C. L. SIEGEL: Vorlesungen iiber 
Himmelsmechanik. Berlin: Springer 1956. For current literature on the n-body problem, 
see the Subject Index of Mathematical Reviews under the heading "Astronomy: 3 and 
n-body problem"; about fourteen papers appear each year on the average. 2 For canonical transformations, see Sects. 87, 91, 95 of the present Article. 
3 See WHITTAKER [28] Chap. 13; FRANK [5], p. 171; GRAMMEL [8], p. 346; G. D. BIRKHOFF: Dynamical Systems, Chap. 9. New York: American Mathematical Society 1927. 
4 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], p. 406; RoUTH [22] I, p. 232; C. CARATHEODORY: Sitzgsber. Bayer. 
Akad. Wiss., Math.-nat. Abt. 1933, 257 (Gesammelte mathematische Schriften, Bd. 2, p. 387. 
Miinchen: Beck 1955). For elementary solutions of the n-body problem, see HAMEL [11], 
pp. 449-464. For the stability of LAGRANGE's particles, see WHITTAKER [28], pp. 409-412, 
and GRAMMEL [8], pp. 370-372. 
Sect. 54. Periodic structures. 81 
54. Periodic structures. Let particles, each of mass m, be attached at equal 
intervals along an infinite straight string, which is massless. If the particles 
execute small transverse oscillations, the displacements Yp (t) satisfy the equations 
(54.1) 
where a2 =Sf(md), S=tension, d=separation of particles. Equations of the 
same form occur for longitudinal oscillations if there are elastic connections 
between the particles. 
If the initial conditions are 
(54.2) 
the solution of (54.1) is 
oo I 
Yp= 2: [otp+lhl(2at)+f1p+lf h 1 (2aT)dT], (54.3) 
1=-00 0 
where ] 21 is the BESSEL function of order 2l. Using the recurrence formulae 
for BESSEL functions!, it is easy to verify this solution. 
The above is the simplest example of a vibrating lattice, which may more 
generally consist of particles of several masses, and may be two-dimensional or 
three-dimensional, as in the crystal lattice of a solid body. The spatial periodicity 
of the system is an essential feature 2• 
For a finite string with fixed ends, carrying n equal particles equally spaced, 
we have equations of motion as in (54.1), but now with end conditions: 
Yp= a2 (Yp+l - 2Yp + Yp-1) 
Yo= Yn+l = 0. 
(P=1, ... n)} 
To solve these equations, we substitute 
Yp = 'Y/p cos (cot+ e) (p = 0, 1, ... n + 1), 
where 'Y/p, co and e are constants; then (54.4) become 
a2 "'pH+ (co2 - 2a2) 7Jp + a2 'Y/p-1 = 0 
7Jo = "'n+l = 0. 
This set of ·equations is satisfied by 
(p = 1, ... n).} 
. 7Jp=Rezp (P=0,1, ... n+1). 
(54.4) 
(54.5) 
(54.6) 
(54.7) 
1 A very convenient list of formulae for BESSEL functions is given inN. W. McLACHLAN: 
BESSEL Functions for Engineers. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1934. 2 For the vibrations of lattices, with an historical.introduction and a discussion of electrical systems mathematically equivalent to the mechanical structures, see L. BRILLOUIN: 
Wave Propagation in Periodic Structures. New York and London: McGraw-Hill 1946. 
To supplement the history given by BRILLOUIN, it may be noted that HAMILTON worked 
intensively on this subject under the title "Dynamics of Light", but published only a brief 
account of his work; see W. R. HAMILTON: Mathematical Papers, Vol. 2, pp. 413-607. 
Cambridge: University Press 1940, HAMILTON obtained the formula (54.3) above by operational methods, the BESSEL functions appearing as integrals (op. cit., pp. 451, 576). 
For loaded strings, chains of rods or gyrostats, and networks, see RouTH [22] II, Chap. 9; 
for loaded strings and molecules, see CoRBEN and STEHLE [3], Chap. 8. For the BoRN-V. KARMAN theory of the specific heat of solids, see M. BLACKMAN, this Encyclopedia Vol. VII 
part 1, p. 330. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/I. 6 
82 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 55. 
provided the complex z's satisfy 
a 2 Zp-1-r + (w2 - 2a2) Zp + a 2 Zp_ 1 = 0 
Re Zo = Re zn-1-1 = 0. 
Choose z0 = - i{J, a pure imaginary, and write 
(p = 1, ... n),} 
zp=-i(JeiP'P (P=0,1, ... n+1). 
(54.8) 
(54.9) 
Then all of (54.8) are satisfied provided only two equations are satisfied, viz. 
a 2 ei"' + (w2 -2a2) +a2 e-i"' = 0 '} . . (54.10) Re z fJ e •(n-1-l)<P= 0. 
The second equation is satisfied if we 
give cp one of the values 
r:n; 
cp,=n+T (r=1, ... n), (54.11) 
and the first of (54.10) is satisfied if, for 
~ cp = cp,, w has the value 
w,=2asinicp. (r=1, ... n). (54.12) 
Thus the normal frequencies (or eigen 
frequencies) of the loaded string with 
fixed ends are 
rig. 2J. Complex amplitudes for loaded string with fixed 
t·nds, drawn for the case of five particles {n = 5) vibrating 
in the fundamental mode (r ~ 1). 
v,= 2n: w, :n: 
a sm-2(n 
. r +D :n: l 
(r- 1, ... n), 
(54.13) 
and the general vibration is given by the superposition of normal modes: 
Yp = -n Ret. i {J, exp (i p cp,) cos (w, t + s,) l 
(54.14) = L {J, sin _~>_!_!!___ cos (2 at sin ~( r :n:_) + s,) r~l n + 1 2 n + 1 
(p = 1, ... n) .J 
The complex amplitudes Zp (54.9) may be displayed on a circle in the complex 
plane as in Fig. 20. 
III. Rigid body with a fixed point. 
55. Rigid body under no forces 1• Consider a rigid body on which no external 
forces act. By (44.4) its mass-centre has a constant velocity, and by (44.7) the 
motion relative to the mass-centre satisfies 
h*=O, (55.1) 
where h* is the angular momentum about the mass-centre. Relative to the 
mass-centre, the body has three degrees of freedom, and the three scalar equations contained in (55.1) suffice to determine the motion. 
1 For analytical details and diagrams, see APPELL [2] II, pp. 164-195; MAcMILLAN [17] II, 
pp. 192-216; RouTH [22] II, Chap. 4; SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], J?P· 418-429; WHITTAKER [28], pp. 144-155; WINKELMANN and GRAMMEL [29], pp. 390-404; R. GRAMMEL: 
Der Kreisel, Bd.1, pp.121-164. 2nd. Edn.: Berlin: Springer 1950. 
Sect. 55. Rigid body under no forces. 
If external forces act but have no resultant moment about the mass-centre, 
the motion relative to the mass-centre is again given by (55.1). This situation 
arises when a rigid body moves in a uniform gravitational field; then the masscentre moves in a parabola, but the motion relative to the mass-centre is uninfluenced by gravity. 
If the rigid body is not free, but has a fixed point 0 about which it can turn 
freely, and if there act on the body no external forces except the reaction maintaining this constraint, then, as in (44.5), we have 
h = 0, (55.2) 
h being the angular momentum about the fixed point. 
The mathematical problems presented by (55.1) and (55.2) are identical, 
except for the fact that in (55 .1) moments of inertia are to be taken relative to 
the mass-centre and in (55 .2) they are to be taken relative to the fixed point. 
In the following discussion we shall deal with (55 .2), with the body turning about 
a fixed point 0; but the argument applies also to motion about the mass-centre 
in free motion. 
Let (i,j, k) be a principal orthonormal triad fixed in the body, and let w be 
the angular velocity of body and triad. Then 
(55.3) 
where A, B, C are the principal moments of inertia at the fixed point 0. By 
(55.2) the vector his fixed in space, and its magnitude his a constant. We have 
then 
a constant. By (25.4) the kinetic energy T is given by 
A w~ + B w~ + C wi = 2 T, 
and this is constant since the reaction of constraint does no work. 
(55.4) 
(55.5) 
The motion may be given a vivid and simple description due to POINSOT1 . 
The POINSOT ellipsoid, with equation 
(55.6) 
is fixed in the body, and the motion is described by saying that this ellipsoid 
rolls on the invariable plane, which is the plane (fixed in space) drawn perpendicular to the fixed vector h at a distance 2 Tfh from 0. The vector drawn from 0 
to the point of contact is the angular velocity vector w; the curves traced by 
this point of contact on the ellipsoid and the plane are called respectively the 
polhode and the herpolhode. 
According to EuLER's equations (49.14), the components of angular velocity 
satisfy 
A 1 - ( B - C) w2 w3 = 0, l 
Bw2 -(C-A)w3w1 =0, (55.7) 
Cw3 - (A -B)w1w2=0. 
The Eqs. (55.4) and (55.5) are integrals of these equations. Assuming the body 
unsymmetric, so that A, B and Care distinct, and choosing the triad (i,j, k) 
so that A > B > C, we obtain an analytic solution of the problem as follows. 
1 L. PorNSOT: Theorie nouvelle de la Rotation des corps. Paris: Bachelier 1851. This 
is interesting historically, because PorNSOT revolted against the purely analytical approach 
to dynamics advocat:d by LAGRANGE. 
6* 
84 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 55. 
The Eqs. (55.4) and (55.5) are solved for w1 and w3 , and the solutions are.substituted in the second of (55.7). This gives a differential equation for w2 , 
of which the solution is an elliptic function. Two cases have to distinguished, 
according as h2 is greater than or less than 2 BT. The solutions are as follows1, 
expressed in terms of Jacobian elliptic functions of modulus k. 
h2 > 2BT: 
m1 =IX dn P (t- t0), m2 = {3 sn P (t- t0), 
{J = v 2AT -h2 p = v-(h2 -2C T) (A -B) 
B(A-B) ' ABC ' 
w3 = y en P (t - t0) , ) 
k=vB-C.2AT-h2. (55.8) 
A-B h2 -2C T 
h2 <2BT: 
w1 = IX en P (t - t0), m2 = {3 sn P (t - t0), 
P = V'J2~! -h2) (B-C) 
ABC ' 
w3 = y dn P (t - t0) , ) 
k =VA -B . n2 -2cT . 
B-C 2AT-h2 {3= 
In both cases we have 
Vh2 - 2CT 
IX= A(A-c)' 
2A T- h2 
'Y = - C(A - C) • 
(55 .9) 
(55.10) 
Once these components of angular velocity have been found, the description 
of the motion is completed by introducing the Eulerian angles{}, q;, 'P (Sect. 11) 
to describe the position of the triad (i,j, k) relative to a fixed triad (I, J, K). 
Choosing Kin the direction of h, one obtains {} and 'P from 
{} Cw3 cos =-h-, 
and q; by a quadrature from 
Bw 
tantp= --A 2 , 
wl (55.11) 
sin '0 ip = w2 sin 1p- w1 cos 1p. (5 5.12) 
In the above procedure we make use of the last row of (11.5) and (19.4). 
The Eqs. (55 .7) have special solutions in which any one of the three components 
of angular velocity is a constant and the other two components vanish. These 
correspond to steady rotations about the three principal axes. 
To· discuss the stability of these steady motions, we note that (55.4) and (-55.5) 
may also be expressed as follows in terms of the components of h on (i,j, k): 
~ + h~ + h: = h2 ' l ~i+~~+~= T. (55.13) 
Taking (~, h2 , h3) as rectangular Cartesian coordinates in a representative space, 
we see that the steady rotations correspond to the points (h, 0, O). (0, k, o), 
(0, 0, h). The Eqs. (55.13) restrict the representative point t-o a curve which is 
the intersection of a sphere and an ellipsoid, and by examining the forms of 
these curves it is easy to see that steady rotations about the axes of greatest and 
least moments of inertia are stable, while a steady rotation about the axis of intermediate moment of inertia is unstable 2• 
1 If }!2 = 2BT, the solution is exponential; cf. RouTH [22] II, p. 120. 
1 The convenience of this representation is due to the fact that we have to deal with a 
sphere and an ellipsoid, whereas, if we stick to angular velocity, (55.4) and (55.5) provide 
two ellipsoids. For a discussion of the two approaches, with diagrams, see ScHAEFER [23], 
pp. 434-447. 
Sect. 56. Spinning top. 
If the body has an axis of inertial symmetry, so that A = B =f: C, the motion 
is greatly simplified. The PorNSOT ellipsoid is now an ellipsoid of revolution, 
and the motion is described by saying that a right-circular polhode cone, fixed 
in the body, rolls on a right-circular herpolhode cone, fixed in space. The cases 
A >C and A< C have to be distinguished; in the former case the cones are 
outside one another, but in the latter case the polhode cone (or body cone) contains the herpolhode cone (or space cone)l. 
56. Spinning top. The toy spinning top is a solid of revolution which· is set 
spinning about its axis of sym111etry and placed in· contact with a horizontal 
plane. The essential feature of this system is that we have a rigid body moving 
in contact with a fixed horizontal plane under the action of two forces, namely, 
the force of gravity acting at the mass-centre and the reaction at the point of 
contact. The contact may be regarded as smooth, in which case we have a bolonomic system. Or it may be rough enough to prevent sliding; then the system 
is non-holonomic. Or it may be imperfectly rough, in which case the body slides 
or rolls according to circumstances 2• 
a.) Unsymmetrical top. In the usual mathematical idealization, the top is 
regarded as a rigid body with a fixed point 0 (the apex or vertex of the top); 
it moves under the influence of two forces, viz. the force of gravity acting at the 
mass-centre D and the reaction at 0 required to hold 0 fixed. The dynamical 
specification consists of seven numbers: the mass m, the principal moments of 
inertia A, B, C at 0, and the coordinates ~. 'YJ, C of D relative to the principal 
axes at 0. The theory of such a top applies also to the motion about its masscentre of a free rigid body acted on by forces equipollent to a single force with 
fixed magnitude and direction, acting at a point fixed in the body; with this 
interpretation, the theory has some significance in ballistics, the force being due 
to the resistance of the air. 
A top is said to be symmetrical if 
A=B, ~=rJ=O, (56.1) 
so that OD is an axis of inertial symmetry. Otherwise the top is unsymmetrical. 
To discuss the motion of an unsymmetrical top, we may use LAGRANGE's 
equations with the kinetic energy expressed in terms of the Eulerian angles 
({}, fll, 'I') as in (49.4). But we keep the physics of the problem better in mind 
by using EULER'S equations (49.14), which may be written 
where 
A (B- C) w~ =- mg (rJK3 - l;K2), l 
Bw2 - (C- A) w3 w1 =- mg (C K1 - ~K ), 
C w3 - (A - B) w1 w2 = - mg (~ K2 - 'YJ K1), 
1 For description and diagrams,' see SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], p. 427. 
(56,.:;2) 
(56.3) 
2 The best general reference for the treatment of these problems is RouTH [22] II, Chap. 5. 
For the effects of friction, see also J. H. }ELLETT: A Treatise on the Theory of Friction, 
Chaps. 5 and 8 (London: Macmillan 1872); and GRAMMEL, pp. 107-121 of op. cit. in Sect. 55. 
In a recent toy, the tippe-top, the body has a spherical base, and it turns over when set 
spinning with a sufficiently high angular velocity; for theory see C. M. BRAAMS: Physica, 
Haag 18, 497 (1952); k D. FoKKER: Physica, Haag 18, 503 (1952); F. A. HARINGX: De 
Ingenieur 4, Technisch Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek 2 (1952); N. M. HuGENHOLTZ: Physica, 
Haag 18, 515 (1952); S. O'BRIEN and J. L. SYNGE: Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. A 56, 23 (1954); 
D. G. PARKYN: Math. Gaz. 40, 260 (1956). 
86 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 56. 
a unit vector directed vertically upward (Fig. 21). Since K is fixed in direction, 
we have • aK 
o = K = Tt + wxK, (56.4) 
or, explicitly, K. K K ) • 1 + W2 a - Wa 2 = 0, 
K2 +w3 K1 -w1 K3 =0, (56.5) 
K3 + w1 K2 - w2 K1 = 0. 
In (56.2) and (56.5) we have six differential equations of the first order 
for w1 , w2 , w3 , K1 , K 2 , K 3 , which quantities are expressible in terms of the 
three Eulerian angles and their first derivatives. 
0 
K These equations possess the following integrals, 
resulting from the constancy of total energy, the 
vanishing of the moment of gravity about the 
vertical through 0, and the fact that K is a unit 
vector: 
f(Aw~ + Bwi + Cw~) + 
+ m g (~ K1 + 1J K2 + C K3) = const, l 
Aw1 K1 + Bw2 K2 + Cw3 K3 = const, 
K~+K~+K~=1. 
(56.6) 
In certain special cases additional integrals 
exist. Of these, the most famous is KoWALEWSKI's 
integral, which occurs in the case where 
A=B=2C, C=O. (56.7) 
We make 1]=0 by changing to new principal 
axes (i,j, k). Then (56.2) and (56.5) give 
Fig. 21. The unsymmetrical top. The force 
of gravity is - mgK. 
2~+~ww =~{3K ,} 
K + tK w3 = twK3 , 
(56.8) 
where w =w1 +iw2 , K =K1 +iK2 , {3=mg~fC. On eliminating K3 , we get 
·:t (wZ- {3 K) + i w3 (wz- {3 K) = 0, (56.9) 
and hence :t log ( w2 - {3 K) = - i w3 . (56.1 0) 
On adding the complex conjugate we obtain the required integral 
(w2 - {3 K) (w2 - {3 K) = const, 
or (w~ - w~ - fJ K1) 2 + (2w1 w2 - fJ K2) 2 = const. 
(56.11) 
(56.12) 
This integral, together with the first two of (56.6), gives us three equations 
in the Eulerian angles and their first derivatives; these equations can be solved 
in terms of hyperelliptic functions 1 . 
1 The above argument follows RoUTH [22] II, pp. 159-161, or APPELL [2] II, pp. 209 to 
211. For a treatment of KOWALEWSKI'S top by LAGRANGE'S equations, see WHITTAKER [28], 
pp. 164-t67. These references may be consulted for other integrable cases of the unsymmetrical top. For much detailed work on the unsymmetrical top, including the use of HAMILTON's 
equations, see HAMEL [11], pp. 407-449. See also GRAMMEL, pp. 164-214 of op. cit. in 
Sect. 55. 
Sect. 56. Spinning top. 87 
(3) Symmetrical top: general motion. To deal with a symmetrical top, satisfying (56.1), it is convenient to use the two orthonormal triads (i,j, k), (1, J, K) 
shown in Fig. 22. (1, J, K) is fixed in space, with K pointing vertically upward; 
k lies along the axis of symmetry 0 D and j is horizontal. The position of the 
triad (i,j, k) is described by the co-latitude{} and the azimuthal angle rp shown 
in Fig. 22. 
The angular velocities w and .2 of the body and of the triad (i,j, k) respectively are 
where 
W = WI~ + ~ + W 3 k, } 
.2 =Dit +il2J +D3 k, 
wi = QI =sin {}tjl, w2 = D2 = - J, Q~ = cos{}tjl; 
the angular momentum about 0 is 
h=Awii+Aw2 j+Cw3 k; (56.15) 
the moment of gravity about 0 is 
G=akx ( -mgl()=-mgasin{}j, (56.16) 
where OD=a. 
The equation of motion is 
(56.17) 
(56.13) 
(56.14) 
and this leads to three differential equations for{}, rp and w3 • But it is convenient 
to proceed indirectly!. By (49.17) we have 
W 3 =S, (56.18) 
Fig. 22. Fixed triad (I, J, K) and moving triad (i,j, k) 
for symmetrical top. 
a constant (the spin of the top). We have also 
{ 1 (h·K) = h·K= G ·K= 0,) 
h·K=a, 
(56.19) 
a constant (the angular momentum about the axis K), and we have the integral 
of energy 
(56.20) 
a constant. Substituting from (56.14), (56.15), and (56.18) in (56.19) and (56.20), 
we get the following two equations for {} and q;: 
Asin2 {}tjl=a-{Jcos{}, ) 
A(/}2 + sin2 {}tjl2) + ~ = 2(E- m g a cos{}), (56.21) 
where fJ = C s. Eliminating tjl and putting cos{}= x, we get the differential 
equation 
(56.22) 
1 For a direct treatment of the symmetrical top by LAGRANGE's equations, see WHIT 
TAKER [28], pp. 155-163, where both Eulerian angles and CAYLEY-KLEIN parameters are 
discussed. For a symmetrical top on a smooth plane, see WHITTAKER [28], pp. 163-164. 
88 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 56. 
Since I (x) is positive in the motion (except when x = 0), and I ( -1) < 0, I (1) < 0, 
this cubic in x has three real zeros x1 , x2 , x3 , such that 
- 1 < X1 < X2< 1 < X3 , (56.23) 
special cases of equality being disregarded here. The variable x oscillates on 
the range x1 .:;;;; x .:;;;; x2 , and the solution is 
cos{} = x = x1 + (x2 - x1) sn2 n (t - t0), (56.24) 
where 
(56.25) 
k being the modulus of the Jacobian elliptic function sn. The azimuthal angle cp 
is given by . oc-flx 
cp = A (1 _ x2) • (56.26) 
It is clear that cp has one sign throughout the motion if, and only if, a./{3lies outside 
the range (x1 , x2). 
The motion is most clearly followed by tracing the path of the point k on 
the unit sphere; its polar coordinates are (fJ, cp). This path is bounded by the 
two circles x = x1 (above) and x = x2 (below), and the path crosses itself if, and 
only if, cp changes sign during the motion1 . 
y) Symmetrical top: steady precession. Any motion of the top may be maintained by applying to it a torque G = h, according to (56.17). Consider, with the 
notation of Fig. 22, the steady motion given by 
{} = const, cp = p t, w3 = s, (56.27) 
where p and s are any constants. By (56.14) and (56.15) we have then 
w1 =!21 = p sin{}, w2 =!22 = 0, !23 = p cos{},) 
h=ApsinfJi+Csk, 
h = Qxh = psinfJ(Ap cos{}- Cs)j. 
(56.28) 
The torque required to maintain this motion is precisely the gravitational torque 
(56.16) provided that p and s satisfy the equation 
Csp-Ap2 cosfJ=mga. (56.29) 
This is the equation defining the steady motions of the symmetric top with its 
axis inclined at an angle{} to the vertical; s is the spin and p is the precessional 
angular velocity with which the axis of the top rotates about the vertical drawn 
through the vertex of the top. 
Given any values of p and fJ, a spins can be found to satisfy (56.29). Conversely, given s and{}, (56.29) is satisfied by two real values of p, viz. 
(56.30) 
1 For further details on the motion of a symmetrical top, see APPELL [2] II, pp. 197-209; 
MAcMILLAN [17] II, pp. 216-249; RouTH [22] II, Chap. S; SYNGE and GRIFFITH [26], 
pp. 432-440; WINKELMANN and GRAMMEL [29], pp. 406-422. Reference may also be 
made to the classical treatise of F. KLEIN and A. SoMMERFELD: Ober die Theorie des Kreisels. 
Leipzig: Teubner 1897-1910. For much detailed information about the theory of the top 
and gyroscopic applications, see R. GRAM MEL: Der Kreisel, 2 vols. 2nd. Edn.: Berlin: Springer 
1950. See also A. GRAY: A Treatise on Gyrostatics and Rotational Motion. London: Macmillan 1918. 
Sect. 56. Spinning top. 89 
provided that 
2 4A m g a cos{} 
s >--c2--· (56.31) 
If s is large, one of these precessional angular velocities is small and the other is 
large; the small value is approximately 
mga 
P = -cs · (56-32) 
which is a very useful simple formula from which the spin can be computed from 
measurement of the slow precession. 
c5) Stability of a sleeping top. A symmetrical top is said to be sleeping when 
it spins about its axis of symmetry with that axis vertical. In this motion, with 
f(x) f(x) 
I Xo>l 
Fig. 23. Graph of the fundamental cubic for a stable Fig. 24. Graph of the fundamental cubic for an unstable 
sleeping top. sleeping top. 
spin s, the constants IX, {J, E which occur in the cubic f(x) of (56.22) have the 
values 
IX = fJ = C s, E = t C s2 + m g a, (56.33) 
and the cubic is 
f(x) = ----- (1 - x) 2 1 + x- -- - . 2mga ( C2s2 ) 
A 2A mga (56. 34) 
This has a double zero at x = 1 and a single zero at 
C2s2 X = X = ---- -- - 1 0 2Amga ' (56.35) 
unless it happens that x0 = 1, in which case there is a triple zero. Let us suppose 
that x0 9=1. Then we have two cases: x0 >1 as shown in Fig. 23, and x0 <1 
as shown in Fig. 24. 
Any disturbed motion for which the constants IX, {J, E differ little from the 
values (56.33) will have its range of oscillation (x1 ,x2) controlled by a cubic 
function, as in (56.22), with a graph which differs little from the graph shown 
in Fig. 23 or 24, whichever applies to the undisturbed motion. The disturbed 
graph (indicated by the broken lines in the figures) will have zeros at (x1 , x2), 
where x1 <x2 <1 by (56.23)- In the case of Fig. 23, these points are close to 1, 
and, in the case of Fig. 24, x1 is close to x0 and x2 is close to 1. In the former 
case the range of oscillation in the disturbed motion is small, and in the latter 
case it is fintte (from x = x0 to x = 1 approximately). The former indicates 
stability, the latter instability. 
90 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 57-
By the same type of argument we see that x0 = 1 gives stability, and so we 
have, as a necessary and sufficient condition for the stability of a sleeping top, 
x0 ~ 1 or equivalently 
2 .....__ 4Amga 
s .:;;;. C2 ' (56.36) 
where sis the spin and (C, A) the axial and transverse moments of inertia at the 
vertex1. 
57. Gyroscopic stiffness. Gyrocompass. rx) Gyroscopic stillness. A gyroscope 
(or gyrostat) is a rigid body with an axis of symmetry, about which it is given a 
great angular velocity. Anyone who has handled a gyroscope knows that the 
spin imparts a sort of stillness to it, so that it seems to resist efforts to change 
71. the direction of its axis. But this is only a crude muscular 
impression. A careful mathematical treatment is needed 
to elucidate the phenomenon, and three aspects of gyro1----W---~a· scopic stiffness will now be discussed; in the first two, 
the symmetry of the body is not used. 
{/ 
We consider a rigid body with a fixed point or a free 
rigid body; in the latter case we are concerned only with 
motion relative to the mass-centre. In either case the 
essential equation may be written [cf. (49.9)] 
(57.1) 
Q 
where h and G are the angular momentum and the applied 
torque about the fixed point or about the mass-centre, as Fig. 25. Gyroscopic stiffness. 
the case may be. 
As a first measure of gyroscopic stiffness, we consider the rate of change of 
the direction of the vector h, which direction we describe by the unit vector 
U=hfh. Then 
hence 
and (57.2) gives 
where 
h=hU+hU=G, U·U=O; 
h=U·G, 
. w 
U=-h ' 
W=G- U(U·G), 
(57.2) 
(57. 3) 
(57.4) 
(57.5) 
so that - W is the vector drawn from the extremity of G to meet h perpendicularly. (Fig. 25). Now U is the velocity of the' point where the unit sphere is cut 
by the vector h. From (57.4) and (57.5) we see that the speed of this point satisfies 
the inequality 
(57.6) 
so that the speed tends to zero ash tends to infinity. In this sense, a large angular 
momentum imparts stillness to the direction of the angular momentum vector. 
Secondly, let (i, j, k) be a principal orthonormal triad fixed in the body. At 
t = 0, let the body be spinning about k with angular velocity s. A torque G is 
1 For a different treatment of the stability of the sleeping top, using LAGRANGE's equations, 
see WHITTAKER [28], p. 206. 
Sect. 57. Gyroscopic stiffness. Gyrocompass. 91 
applied. We consider the consequent motion of the representative point k on 
the unit sphere. For its velocity and acceleration at any instant we have 
k = roxk, k = wxk+rox(roxk). 
At t=O we have 
and so, by EULER's equations (49.14), 
A m1 = G1 , B m2 = G2 , C m3 = G3 • 
Thus at t = 0 the velocity and acceleration are 
(57.10) 
The spin sis not involved in this acceleration, which is in fact the same as when 
s = 0. thus there is no gyroscopic stiflness 
as far as the acceleration of k is concerned. 
Thirdly, consider a body with axis ~ 
of symmetry k and moments of inertia 
(A, A, C). Let (I,J, K) be an orthonormal ·~ "' 
triad fixed in space, and let the body be t 
made to move with spin s k and with k 
rotating in the plane (K, 1) with (precessional) angular velocity pJ. Then its 
angular velocity and angular momentum 
are i 
(57.7) 
(57.8) 
(57.9) 
ro=PJ+sk, h=APJ+Csk, (57.11) Fig. 26. Gyroscopic couple, precession, and spin. 
and the torque required to maintain this motion is 
G =h = Csk= Csroxk = Cspi, (57.12) 
where i is such that (i, J, k) form an orthonormal triad as in Fig. 26. This torque 
is known as the gyroscopic couple; since it is proportional to s, the g·yroscopic 
couple is a manifestation of gyroscopic stiftness. Fig. 26 indicates, in the form of 
quadrants drawn on a unit sphere, the senses of the couple, the precession, and 
the spin. 
{3) Gyrocompass. Consider a rigid body with an axis of inertial symmetry at 
its mass-centre 0, mounted so that it can turn freely about 0, this point being 
attached to the surface of the rotating earth. This maybe called a free gyrocompass. 
Its motion is determined by (57.1), hand G being measured relative to 0. The 
torque G is due solely to the gravitational attraction of the earth. Supposing 
the earth uniform and spherical, the resultant of the gravitational forces on the 
particles of the body passes through the centre of the earth. But it does not 
in general pass through 0, and so G=J=O. However, this torque is actually so 
small as to be negligible in practice. Putting G = 0, we have h = const, and 
the motion of the gyrocompass is the POINSOT motion of Sect. 55 ; the axis of 
symmetry of the gyrocompass rotates with constant precessional angular 
velocity about some line fixed in space, determined by the initial conditions. 
In fact, the free gyrocompass indicates to the terrestrial dweller a direction 
fixed in space. 
92 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 58. 
Consider now the case where the axis of symmetry of the gyrocompass is 
compelled (by a workless constraint) to remain in a horizontal plane1 . In Fig. 27, 
PQ is part of the axis of the earth (from south to north); K is a unit vector parallel 
to PQ; OQ is a horizontal line (south to north) ; A. is the latitude of 0; (i, j, k) 
is an orthonormal triad with j vertical and k along the axis of symmetry of the 
gyroscope; {} is the inclination of k to OQ (positive to the west); the circle in 
perspective represents a horizontal plaBe tangent to the earth's surface at 0. 
The angular velocity of the gyroscope is compounded of (i) the angular velocity 
of the earth, QK, (ii) the angular velocity of the triad relative to the earth, /}j, 
and (iii) the spin, s0 k. Hence its angular momentum, relative to 0, is 
e h = - A Q ~in{} cos A.i + } 
~ K +A(~+DsinA.)j+Csk, (S 7.
13) 
p 
Fig. 27. Gyrocompass with its 
axis in a horizontal plane. 
j where (A, A, C) are the moments of inertia at 0 
and s = s0 +D cos{} cos A.. 
Neglecting, as earlier, any torque due to gravity, 
the torque G maintaining the axis in the horizontal 
plane has the direction of i. The components of 
(57.1) in the direction of k andj give s=const and 
A ~ + C s Q cosA. sin{} - } 
-A Q2 sin{} cos{} cos2 A.= 0. (57"
14) 
This equation describes the oscillations of the 
gyrocompass about the south-north horizontal line 
OQ. If the term in Q 2 is neglected, we get an 
equation of the form (34.2), which describes the finite oscillations of a circular 
pendulum. For small oscillations, the period is 
T = 2n -v;;QAcosJ. . (57.15) 
Cases where the constraining plane is not horizontal, or where the point fixed 
to the earth's surface is not the mass-centre (the barygyroscope), are similarly 
treated 2• 
IV. Impulsive motion. 
58. Impulsive forces and moments. Impulsive work. LAGRANGE's equations. 
For a particle, the equation of motion (30.1) gives 
t, 
mv -mv!~JFdt, (58.1) 
the subscripts 1 and 2 referring to times t1 and t2 respectively. Proceeding to a 
limit in which the force F tends to infinity and the interval t2 - t1 tends to zero, 
we derive the concept of an impulsive force F, such that its application to a 
particle produces a finite instantaneous change in velocity given by 
mLJv =F. (58.2) 
1 This is a mathematical simplification of the constraint used in practice; see LAMB [14], 
p. 144; TH. PoscHL: Handbuch der Physik, Vol. 5. pp. 543-552 (Berlin: Springer 1927); 
R. F. DEIMEL: Mechanics of the Gyroscope (New York: Macmillan 1929; reprinted by Dover 
Publications Inc.); A. L. RAWLINGS: The Theory of the Gyroscopic Compass (New York: 
Macmillan 1929); E. S. FERRY: Applied Gyrodynamics (New York: Wiley 1932); R. GRAMMEL: Der Kreisel, Bd. 2 (2nd. Edn.: Berlin: Springer 19 50). 2 Cf. APPELL [2] Ii, pp. 367-3 76. 
S ect. 58. Impulsive forces and moments. Impulsive work. LAGRANGE's equations. 93 
For some mathematical purposes, impulsive forces may be treated in the 
same way as ordinary forces. We may speak of the impulsive moment rxF of 
an impulsive force F applied at the position r; and we may speak of the impulsive 
work done by an impulsive force, defined by 
We must of course remember that the addition of the word impulsive changes 
the nature of the entity involved; its physical dimensions are altered, being 
multiplied by time. 
By integrating other equations of motion over a short range of time and proceeding to a limit as above, we derive impulsive principles from the principles 
of ordinary dynamics. Thus (44.2) leads to an impulsive law of linear momentum, expressed by 
where Fis the sum of all external impulses; and (44.4) leads to 
mLlv =F, 
(58.4) 
(58.5) 
where v is the velocity of the mass-centre of a system. Further, by (44.5) and 
(44.7), we have (58.6) 
the first applying to any fixed point and the second to the mass-centre; here G 
and G* are impulsive moments. 
In the case of energy, however, the transition from ordinary dynamics to 
impulsive dynamics cannot be effected in this simple way. By (45.3) the increase 
in the kinetic energy of a system is 
t,. t, p 
LlT=fWdt=J l:,Jii·r,dt, (58.7) 
t, t, i=l 
the summation being carried out over the P particles which form the system. But 
when we proceed to the limit, making the forces tend to infinity and the timeinterval to zero, we get p ~ 
LlT =~F.· v1, (58.8) 
i=l 
where v. are unknown mean values of the velocities. Although we may find it 
convenient to speak of impulsive work, we are not to connect it with increase in 
energy. The fact is that, _in impulsive dynamics, mechanical energy may be 
converted into heat, and in that form has no place in Newtonian dynamics1. 
Consider now LAGRANGE's equations (46.17) for a holonomic system. Since 
the generalized velocities remain finite on proceeding to the limit, we get 
(58.9) 
where Q11 are generalized impulsive forces, which may be calculated in terms of 
impulsive work by the formula 
N...... ....... P ...... L QQ!Jq11 = dW =I:, F.· dr1• (58.10) 
e=l i=l 
1 In relativity; heat generated in a collision is taken care of within the framework of 
mechanics by an increase in proper mass; cf. Sect. 121 of this article and J. L. SYNGE: 
Relativity: the Special Theory, p. 184. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co. 1956. 
94 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 59. 
Problems in impulsive dynamics are mathematically far simpler than problems 
of ordinary dynamics, because we have only algebraic equations instead of differential equations to solve. 
59. Collisions. Coefficient of restitution. The theory of collisions has been 
largely inspired by ball-games, billiards in particular; at the same time this theory 
provides models for molecular encounters, with angular momentum taken into 
account!. 
Consider two rigid bodies, 51 and 52 , moving in any manner. At a certain 
instant they find themselves in contact, and a continuation of their motions would 
cause their volumes to overlap. This overlapping is averted by the action of a 
Fig. 28. Collision of rigid bodies. 
pair of impulsive forces, equal and opposite, 
acting at the point of contact C (Fig. 28). 
Let 0 1 , 0 2 be the mass-centres at the 
instant of collision and 1\, r 2 the position 
vectors of C relative to 01 , 0 2 respectively. 
Let m1 , m2 be the masses of the bodies. Let 
v1 , v2 be the velocities of the mass-centres 
before collision and h1 , h2 the angular momenta relative to the mass-centres, also before 
collision; let the same symbols marked with 
primes denote these quantities after collision. 
Let - F and iJ denote the impulsive forces 
acting on 51 and 52 respectively. 
Then, as in (58.5) and (58.6), we have 
m1 (v~- v1) = - F, ~ m2 (v; - v 2) = F, ~ } 
h~- h1 =-r 1 xF, h;- h2 = r 2 xF. (59.1) 
Here v1 , v2 , h1 , h 2 , r 1 , r 2 are known, and we have 12 scalar equations for 15 unknowns, viz. the components of the 5 vectors 
(59.2) 
Since the positions of the bodies are known, and also the moments of inertia, 
h~ determines the angular velocity w~, and conversely; the same is true of h~ 
and w;. Thus, without further hypotheses, the problem of determining the 
motion resulting from collision has 15 -12 = 3 degrees of indeterminacy. 
We assume now that the bodies are smooth 2, which means that the impulsive 
forces act at right angles to the common tangent plane, so that we have 
(59-3) 
where n is the unit normal vector, drawn from 51 into 52 . This assumption reduces the number of unknowns to 13, viz. 
(59.4) 
I In Sect. 52 the bodies in an encounter were particles without angular momentum. 2 For a detailed treatment of collisions, rough or smooth, see HAMEL [11], pp. 395-402; 
ROUTH [22] I, pp. 257-266; G. BOULIGAND: Mecanique rationnelle, Chaps. 18, 19 (Paris: 
Vuibert 1954); TH. PoscHL: Handbuch der Physik, Vol. 6, pp. 503-525 (Berlin: Springer 
1928). For a treatment in terms of Motorrechnung, see W. RAHER: Ost. Ing.-Arch. 9, 55 
(1954). The collision of two smooth elastic spheres was treated in a different way in Sect. 52 
of the present article. 
Sect. 59. Collisions. Coefficient of restitution. 95 
The remaining indeterminacy may be removed by assuming the conservation 
of energy, T'= T. (59.5) 
Here T is known and T' can be expressed in terms of v~, v~, h~, h~. 
But we can follow a more general procedure which includes this as a particular 
case. Let u1 , u2 be the velocities of the two particles in contact at C, so that 
u1 = v1 + w1 x r 1 , } 
u2 = v2 + w 2 xr2 , 
(59.6) 
where w1 and w2 are the angular velocities of the bodies. Formulae of this form 
may be thought of as holding, not only at the beginning of the collision, but 
throughout the short period of its duration. We introduce the speed of compression 
c, defined by (59.7) 
which is initially positive since the bodies tend to overlap. The whole collision 
is broken into (i) a period of compression with c >0 and (ii) a period of restitution 
with c <0. In the period of compression there act impulsive forces just sufficient 
to reduce c to zero. Denoting them by (-In, In), and writing v~, v~', ... for 
quantities at the end of the period of compression, we have 
(v~'-v )=-In, m2 (v;'-v 2)=In, ) 
h~'- h1 =-r1 xin, h~- h2 = r 2 xin, 
c" = n · (u~- u~) = 0. 
(59.8) 
The 13 scalar equations contained in (59.8) suffice to determine I and the state 
of motion at the end of the period of compression. 
As for the period of restitution, it is assumed that the impulsive forces for 
this period are proportional to the impulsive forces during compression; the 
factor of proportionality, denoted by e, is called the coefficient of restitution. Its 
value ranges from e = 0 (inelastic collision) to e = 1 (elastic collision); collisions 
with intermediate values of e are called semi-elastic. 
The final result of the collision is given by substituting 
F=(1+e)In (59.9) 
in (59.1), the value of I having been found from (59.8). 
It can be shown that e = 1 implies T' = T as in (59.5) 
As an illustration of the coefficient of restitution, consider the collision of 
two smooth homogeneous spheres. In this case the impulsive forces have no 
moments about the mass-centres, and (59.8) reduce to 
I= _mtmz_n. 
mt + mz (vl- v2) l m1 m2 c 
-~~ m--;' 
where c is the initial speed of compression. By (59.1) and (59.9) we have 
(59.10) 
(59.11) 
(v~-v )=-(1+e)In, m2 (v;-v 2)=(1+e)In, (59.12) 
96 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
and therefore the velocities after collision are 
v' = v - __ »Z~c- (1 +e) n ) 1 1 ml + m2 ' 
v~=t, + -~L-(1+e)n. ml + m2 
The loss of kinetic energy is 
Sect. 60. 
(59.13) 
(59.14) 
60. Minimal theorems in impulsive motion 1• For a system of P particles, 
acted on by impulsive forces F;, we have, by (58.2), 
(60.1) 
where W; are arbitrary vectors and V;, v~ the velocities of the particles before 
and after the application of the impulsive forces. Here and below, summations 
are fori= 1, . .. P. 
The Eq. (60.1) may be regarded as a form of n'ALEMBERT's principle (Sect.45), 
valid for impulsive motion. 
The system may be subject to constraints, due to which certain particles 
are fixed or confined to smooth fixed curves or surfaces, or the distances 
between certain particles are kept constant (rigidity). Such constraints may 
persist through the application of the impulsive forces, or they may suddenly 
come into existence, or they may be suddenly abolished. In any case we can 
break down the impulsive forces into 
(60.2) 
where P; are given or applied impulsive forces, and R; are impulsive forces of 
constraint. The latter satisfy ~ 
~R,·w,=O, (60.3) 
if w, are velocities satisfying the constraint. 
oc) CARNOT's theorem (first part). Theorem: If there are no applied impulsive 
forces, the sudden introduction of a constraint reduces the kinetic energy 2• 
Toprovethistheorem, we choose W 0=vi in (60.1); the right hand side vanishes, and we have ~ m, (v; - v;) · v; = 0. (60.4) 
The loss of kinetic energy can therefore be expressed as a positive-definite expression: T- T' = l ~ m, v, · v, -l ~ m, v; · v; } 
= l ~ m, (v;- v;) · (v,- v:J > 0. (60.5) 
fJ) CARNOT 's theorem (second part). Theorem: Kinetic energy is increased 
when rigid bonds are broken by an explosion. 
By an "explosion" we understand that impulsive forces operate between 
the particles of the system, in equal opposite pairs acting along the joining line, 
like action and reaction in NEWTON's Third Law. Although they occur in these 
balanced pairs, these are applied impulsive forces P;, not impulsive forces of 
constraint R;; the latter will be present in those bonds of rigidity which remain 
unbroken. 
1 Cf. RoUTH [22] I, pp. 298-304; APPELL [2] II, pp. 527-539. 2 The kinetic energy is unchanged in the exceptional case where the introduction of the 
constraint changes no velocity. Exceptional cases like this are omitted in the enunciations 
and proofs. 
Sect. 60. Minimal theorems in impulsive motion. 97 
For the same geometrical reason as that by which ordinary reactions in rigid 
bonds do no work, we have 
V; being the velocities before the explosion; we have also 
L,R;·t';=O, 
and hence, on putting W;=V; in (60.1), 
L, m; (v; - v;) · V; = 0. 
(60.6) 
(60.7) 
(60.8) 
Consequently the gain in kinetic energy can be expressed as a positive-definite 
expression : 
T' - T = t L, m; v; · v; - t L, m; V; · V; } 
= t L, m; (v; - v;) · (v; - v;) > 0. (60.9) 
y) KELVIN's theorem. Theorem: If a system, initially at rest, is set in motion 
by applied impulsive forces acting on named particles of the system, these impulsive forces being such that the velocities of the named particles have prescribed 
values, then the kinetic energy is less than that of any hypothetical motion in 
which the constraints of the system are satisfied and the named particles have 
the prescribed velocities. 
Let v~ be the actual velocities and V~1 the velocities in the hypothetical motion, 
so that v~ = V~1 for the named particles. Then 
(60.10) 
if W; = v~- v;1 , because ~ = 0 except for the named particles and W; = 0 
for them. Further ~ L R;. W; = 0, (60.11) 
because both v: and v; 1 satisfy the constraints. Putting V; = 0 m (60.1), since 
the system is initially at rest, we have then 
'\' I ( I ") LJ m;V; · V;- V; = 0; (60.12) 
hence T"- T1 can be expressed as a positive-definite expression: 
T il Tl 1 '\' " " 1 '\' ' I } - = 2 LJ m,.· V; · V; - 2 L. m; V; · V; 
1 '\' ( " I) ( , I) = 2 LJ m; V; - V; · V; - V; > 0. (60.13) 
(J) BERTRAND's theorem. Theorem: A system in motion is acted on by given 
applied impulsive forces, and as a result its kinetic energy becomes T'. Then 
T' > T", where T" is the kinetic energy resulting from the application of the 
same impulsive forces to the same initial motion, but now subject to constraints 
consistent with that motion. 
Let V; be the initial velocities, v; the final velocities in the absence of the 
additional constraints, and v;l the velocities in the presence of those constraints. 
If ii: and il;l are the impulsive forces of constraint in the two cases, we have 
L ~~ " "'R~" " R; . V; = 0' LJ i . t'; = 0' (60.14) 
since it is a question of additional constraints. Then, by (60.1), P; being the 
given applied impulsive forces, we have 
"'m- (v~- v.) · v" = P. · t{ 1 L...J } ~ ~ -~ , 1 l' 
'\' (" ) " p~ " LJ m1 V; - t'; · V; = ; · V; , 
(60.15) 
Handh11rh drr Physik, Brl. III/I. 7 
98 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 61. 
and so, by subtraction, 
{60.16) 
Therefore T' - T" may be expressed as a positive-definite expression: 
(60.17) 
E. General dynamical theory. 
I. Geometrical representations of dynamics. 
61. The role of ~eneral dynamical theory. The most obvious goal of all 
dynamical theory is to solve dynamical problems which arise in physics or 
astronomy. Starting from a physical concept (Sect. 2), such as the solar 
system, we set up a corresponding mathematical concept, or mathematical 
model, and try to solve the differential equations belonging to that model. 
But it is not altogether clear what we mean when we speak of solving a set 
of differential equations. True, a problem is regarded as solved when the coordinates of the particles of the model at time t have been expressed as simple functions of t and of those parameters which define the initial positions and velocities. 
But what are simple functions? We no longer regard a function f (t) as a formal 
expression in t, but as a quantity determined by t, and it is impossible to draw 
a sharp line between functions which are simple and those which are not. If we 
drop the word simple and speak merely of functions, then every dynamical problem is solved as soon as it has been well stated, because the differential equations, with the initial conditions and the value of t, determine the coordinates 
at time t. This is not mathematical hair-splitting, but hard fact, for modern methods of electronic computation provide arithmetical solutions to dynamical 
problems to any desired degree of accuracy, the differential equations being 
replaced by difference equations. In ballistics, for example, this modern method 
has largely replaced the search for formulae representing the solution1 . 
But, though precise definitions may elude us, there can be no doubt that the 
two-body problem has a simple solution, whereas the three-body problem has 
not. In the case of the two-body problem we have formulae involving parameters; 
we can change the values of those parameters, and so study what we may call 
the mathematical structure of the class of all solutions, with intellectual satisfaction and understanding. We can, moreover, form accurate vivid mental pictures 
of the behaviour of the two bodies, so that their motion becomes almost as real 
to us as the motion of a piece of machinery working before our eyes. 
In the case of the three-body problem, a numerical solution, based on assigned 
values of the parameters involved, tells us how the bodies move under those 
given circumstances. But a single numerical solution doe:> not reveal the mathematical structure of the problem, nor does a collection of such solutions. 
In this case, as in many others, we must seek an understanding of mathematical 
structure by examining the differential equations themselves. 
But we can be more ambitious. We can aim, not at understanding the mathematical structure of some selected dynamical problem, but at understanding 
the mathematical structure of a class of problems so wide that we may regard 
the whole of dynamics as our objective. We shall concentrate our attention 
1 The historical development of the idea of an "unsolved" dynamical problem is discussed 
by WrNTNER [30], p. 143. 
Sect. 61. The role of general dynamical theory. 99 
on those systems to which LAGRANGE's equations of motion, or HAMILTON's, 
are applicable, but that includes a very wide range of problems indeed. 
We recognize two purposes in the study of general methods in dynamics. 
First, the practical purpose, to increase our power in solving specific problems 
by developing standard techniques with a wide range of applicability. Secondly, 
the intellectual purpose, to understand the mathematical structure of dynamics. 
But it is not as simple as that. The development of quantum mechanics out of 
classical dynamics shows that, in the long run, an understanding of the mathematical structure of dynamics may have more practical results (i.e. results which 
increase our knowledge of the physical world) than a concentration on specific 
problems of the type for which dynamical methods were originally designed. 
With this in mind, the emphasis in the following account of general dynamical 
theory will be laid on mathematical structure, specific dynamical problems 
being regarded more in the nature of illustrations than as objectives in themselves. 
We seek then to understand the mathematical structure of dynamics. But 
here we encounter a formidable difficulty, because understanding is a very personal matter. It is not a question of accepting this theorem or that, but of gaining 
an overall picture in which the details are subordinated to a central idea, and 
opinions are bound to differ widely as to the best central idea to choose. What 
is psychologically satisfying to one man may not suit another. 
In elementary dynamics we all meet on common ground, for we share a. vivicl 
geometrical intuition of the motion of a particle, and to this intuition the formulae 
we use are subordinated. There exists, in fact, a triangle of mental links of this 
nature: 
physical concept 
geometrical picture formulae 
But when we pass on to more complicated dynamical systems, the geometrical 
picture becomes harder and harder to follow, and it is thrust into the background, 
so that dynamics becomes, to a great extent, a matter of formulae only. This 
is satisfactory for those who take pleasure in purely formal arguments, but for 
most of us the loss of geometrical intuition is a serious handicap. In the present 
article an attempt is made to give geometrical intuition its just place in general 
dynamical theory by the systematic use of representative spaces in which the 
motion of a representative point corresponds to the motion of a dynamical system1. 
1 The geometrical approach to dynamics seems to have originated with H. HERTZ: Die 
Prinzipien der Mechanik in neuem Zusammenhang dargestellt (Leipzig 1894). An English 
translation by D. E. JONES and J. T. WALLEY ( 1899) has been republished recently: H. HERTZ: 
The Principles of Mechanics (New York: Dover Publications Inc. 1956). This contains an 
Introductory Essay by R. S. CoHEN (with a bibliography) and a Preface by H. VON HELMHOLTZ. See also G. RicCI and T. LEvi-CIVITA: Methodes de calcul absolu et leurs applications. Math. Ann. 54, 125-201 ( 1901) and Paris: Blanchard 1923; J. W. GIBBS: Elementary 
Principles in Statistical Mechanics (Yale: Scribner 1902; see The Collected Works of J. W. 
GIBBS, Vol. 2. New York-London-Toronto: Longmans & Green 1928); J. L. SYNGE: Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lon d., Ser. A 226, 31 -106 (1926); L. BRILLOUIN: Les Tenseurs en mecanique et en elasticite (Paris: Masson 1938); LANCZOS [15]; Pll.ANGE [21]. 
7* 
100 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 62. 
General dynamical theory occupies a curious position in physics. Historically, it has been suggested by, and developed in terms of, the Newtonian dynamics 
of particles and rigid bodies. But we feel an urgent need to give it a wider scope, 
presenting it as a consistent mathematical theory applicable to any physical 
system the behaviour of which can be expressed in Lagrangian or Hamiltonian 
form. There is a temptation to present it as pure mathematics, and the exposition which follows is a compromise. The argument is not of sufficient precision 
to satisfy a modern pure mathematician, but at the same time it does attempt 
to exhibit a mathematical structure independent (except for suggestion and 
explanation) of the preceding part of this article. Everything is based on a Lagrangian or a Hamiltonian, or an equivalent concept. Kinetic energy, so important 
in the direct physical applications of Newtonian dynamics, plays a minor part 
(in illustrative examples and in Sects. 84 and 85), and the Hamiltonian is not 
restricted to be a quadratic function of the generalized momenta, as it always 
is in Newtonian dynamics. 
62. Representative spaces. The following representative spaces will be used 
to elucidate dynamical theory1 : 
Name 
Configuration space . 
Space of events . . . 
Momentum-energy space 
Phase space . . . . . . 
Space of states . . . . 
Space of states and energy 
Symbol 
Q 
QT 
PH 
QP 
QTP 
QTPH 
I Dimensionality I 
N 
N+1 
N+1 
2N 
2N+ 1 
2N+2 
Coordinates 
Here and throughout PartE, except where noted to the contrary, small 
Greek suffixes take the values 1, 2, ... N, and small Latin suffixes the values 
1, 2, ... N + 1, with the summation convention for a repeated suffix in each case. 
The representative spaces are listed above in order of increasing dimensionality; 
they will be treated in a different, more convenient, order. 
Our aim is to present dynamical theory in a fairly abstract way, so that the 
results may be applicable outside the range of traditional Newtonian dynamics. 
But, to keep our feet on the ground, let us briefly consider the above representative 
spaces relative to a Newtonian system (holonomic, and either scleronomic or 
rheonomic) with N degrees of freedom and generalized coordinates qP. The 
system possesses a Lagrangian L(q, t, q) and moves in accordance with LAGRANGE's 
equations of motion (Sect. 46); equivalently, it possesses a Hamiltonian H(q, t, p) 
and moves in accordance with HAMILTON's equations (Sect. 47). We shall call 
the system conservative if t is absent from H (or, equivalently, absent from L), 
so that we have 
as in (47.9), this implies 
aH 
--- = o· at ' 
H=E, 
(62.1) 
(62.2) 
a constant of the motion. All motions for which E has a common value constitute 
an isoenergetic dynamics 2• 
1 There are other representative spaces which might be considered, such as the space of 
3N dimensions, with coordinates qQ, qp, Pp· used by P. A.M. DIRAC, Canad. J. Math. 2, 
129-148 (1950). 2 A family of orbits which have the same constant energy is also called a natural family; 
cf. \VHITTAKER [28], p. 387. 
Sect. 62. Representative spaces. 101 
Of all the representative spaces, Q is the simplest. If the system consists of 
a single particle moving in ordinary space, then Q is ordinary space; and if the 
particle is constrained to move on a surface or curve, then Q is that surface or 
curve. However, the picture of the totality of trajectories is somewhat complicated, for a trajectory is not determined by a point in Q and a direction in Q 
(i.e. the ratios dq1 : dq2 : ••• dqN)· For a conservative system, a single infinity of tra~ 
jectories correspond to a given direction at a point (consider a particle in a 
gravitational field); for a non-conservative system, there is a double infinity of 
trajectories. 
The totality of trajectories is easier to visualize in Q T, in which a trajectory 
is determined by a point and a direction (i.e. the ratios dq1 :dq2 : ••• dqN:dt, which 
ratios are the generalized velocities). This applies whether the system is conservative or not. Moreover, the treatment oft on a parity with the coordinates qu 
makes Q T a suitable background for relativistic dynamics. -
The space PH is of rather secondary importance. It is useful when we deal 
with an encounter, in which a number of particles, initially in free independent 
motion, come under the influence of one another, and then separate with final 
motions free and independent. When the particles are moving freely and independently (i.e. before and after the encounter), the representative point maintains a fixed position in PH, and the effect of the encounter is to move this point 
from one such position to another. 
The space Q P is, thanks largely to the work of J. W. GIBBS on statistical 
mechanics, probably the best known of the spaces listed above. If the system 
is conservative, then the totality of trajectories appears as a congruence of curves 
in Q P, one curve passing through each point. This is a satisfyingly simple 
picture, but it is complicated in the non-conservative case, for then there is a 
single infinity of trajectories through each point. Moreover, it is not well suited 
to relativity, for which t should be treated on a parity with qQ. 
In the space Q T P the time t is treated on a parity with the coordinates qQ 
and the momenta Pe; the Hamiltonian H(q, t, p) is a function of position in the 
space. The picture of the trajectories is simpler than in Q P for a non-conservative system, for now we have a congruence of curves, one through each point. 
Q T P differs from Q P and Q T PH in having an odd dimensionality-an important difference from a mathematical standpoint. 
The space Q T PH provides the most general approach to dynamics. In it 
t and H are treated on a parity with qQ and pQ, so that there is complete forinal 
symmetry. The 2N +2 coordinates fall into two groups, (q, t) and (p, H), the 
two groups being almost interchangeable in the dynamical theory. To preserve 
symmetry, a dynamics is best defined, not by giving H as a function of 
(q, t, p), but by writing down an energy equation involving, in general, all 
the 2N + 2 coordinates of Q T PH. This equation defines a surface of 2N + 1 
dimensions in Q T PH, and the representative point is confined to this surface; 
but it is sometimes convenient to use an energy function instead of an energy 
equation, in order to deal with the whole space instead of merely with 
this surface. 
The use of Q T PH is immediately suggested by HAMILTON's optical method1 
in which all the coordinates in space are treated on a parity. The symmetrical approach to dynamics is indicated in HAMILTC1N's calculus of principal 
1 W. R. HAMILTON: Mathematical Papers I. Cambridge: "L'niversity Press 1931. See 
footnote in Sect. 67. 
102 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 63. 
relations1, and in modern times it has been revived 2• All theory developed in 
Q T PH can be immediately transferred to isoenergetic dynamics in Q P by a 
mere reduction of dimensionality. 
63. Topological remarks. As a simple illustration of a topological situation 
often encountered in a more complicated form, consider a particle moving on 
a circle with equation (63 .1) 
where (~. 'Y}) are rectangular Cartesian coordinates and a a constant. The configuration space Q is the circle itself, and we may assign a generalized coordinate q 
by writing ~=a cosq, 'YJ = asinq, - oo<q< oo. (63.2) 
Then any value of q determines a configuration (a point of Q); but to any configuration (or point of Q) there corresponds an infinite set of values of q, separated 
by intervals of 2n. We may then speak of a representative space (say Q') which 
Fig. 29. The representative space Q' in which an infinite set of congruent points, with separations 2n in the cyclic coordinate q, correspond to a single configuration or point of the space Q. 
is an infinite line with q measured off along it (Fig. 29); but we must always 
remember that the correspondence between configurations and the points of 
Q' is not 1 : 1. We may call q a cyclic 3 coordinate, and the increment in it which 
restores the configuration its cyclic constant (2n in the above case). The set of 
points in Q' obtained by increasing the cyclic coordinate by any multiple of the 
cyclic constant may be called a set of congruent points. 
This many-valued representation is objectionable, but it is practical and 
commonly used. We can get a 1:1 correspondence between configurations and 
q-values by writing, instead of (63.2), 
~ = acosq, 'YJ =a sin q, o:s;;q<2n. (63.3) 
But now the correspondence is discontinuous, for, by giving the particle a small 
displacement from the configuration q = 0, in the sense of q decreasing, we find q 
suddenly increased by 2n. 
Such discontinuous representations are even more objectionable than multiple valued representations, and we turn to the recognized topological plan. 
This involves the use of two coordinate systems, with an overlap. We assign 
coordinates q, q' as follows: 
~=a cosq, 
~ = acosq', 
'YJ = a sin q, - oc ;;;;;: q ;;;;;: n + oc, } 
'YJ = - a sin q', 0 ;;;;;: q' ;;;;;: n . (63.4) 
In Fig. 30, the arc EADBF is covered by q and AECF B by q', with overlaps 
on A E and BF. In the overlaps we assign transfo~mations 
AE: q= -q', BF: q-n=n-q'. (63- 5) 
1 W. R. HAMILTON: Mathematical Papers II, pp. 297-410. Cambridge: University Press 
1940. 2 P. A.M. DIRAC: Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 29, 389-400 (1933).- CoRBEN and STEHLE 
[3], p. 298. - LANCZOS [15], p. 185. 3 In many dynamical problems, cyclic coordinates are ignorable [cf. Sect. 46], and the 
word cyclic is often regarded as synonymous with ignorable; cf. GoLDSTEI)! [7], p. 48. In 
this article we shall use the word cyclic only in the above topological sense. 
Sect. 63. Topological remarks. 103 
If we take the particle round the circle in the counter-clockwise sense, starting 
from.A, we"use the coordinate q until we get into BF. Then we switch to q', 
and carry on with q' until we get into A E, when we switch back to q. In this 
way we have, outside the overlaps, a continuous 1 : 1 correspondence between 
the points of Q and the values of the appropriate coordinate (q or q'); in each 
overlap, we have a choice between two coordinates, and, when we leave an overlap, we leave it with that coordinate appropriate to the domain into which we 
are going. Although clumsier than the use of a cyclic coordinate, conceptually 
this is the most satisfactory method. 
In ordinary dynamics we start with a physical system which we could, if 
need be, construct in the space of our experience, and topological questions 
concerning the configuration space Q may be answered by appeal to our intuition 
of ordinary space. No such intuition is available 
to us when we start to develop general dynamical theory; it must be built up on a 
mathematical basis, and, if our intuition is to 
be correct and useful, we should avoid purely 
formal arguments. 
0 
It is not enough to say that we shall discuss a dynamical system with generalized co- 81-------:-r-::::::o<~--r::---?----tA 
ordinates qo and a Lagrangian L(q, t, q). The 
topology of the space Q should be prescribed. 
There are four ways of doing this: 
(i) We may say that each of the coordinates 
qe ranges from - oo to + oo, with a continuous 
1 : 1 correspondence between configurations, or 
points of Q, and the sets of values (q1 , q2 , ••• ). 
This is the simplest case (Euclidean topology). 
c 
Fig. 30. Overlapping coordinate systems. 
We need not stick to these coordinates; we can pass to others, provided that, 
in the domain of Q considered, the transformation is smooth and the Jacobian 
does not vanish. 
(ii) We may regard Q as immersed in a Euclidean space of higher dimensionality. Then the topology of Q is intrinsic in the equations which define it as a 
subspace. 
(iii) We may modify (i) by adding cyclic coordinates, thus replacing Q by 
a space Q', a point of Q corresponding to a set (in general multiply infinite) of 
congruent points in Q'. 
(iv) We may introduce, not one coordinate system, but several, with overlapping domains and specified smooth 1 formulae of transformation in the overlaps. 
The following topological terms are important. 
A circuit is a closed curve in the representative space. It is reducible if it can 
be reduced to a single point by continuous transformation in the space; otherwise 
it is irreducible. Two circuits are reconcilable if they can be transformed into one 
another by continous transformation; if they cam:iot, they are irreconcilable. 
All reducible circuits are reconcilable. Two irreducible circuits may be reconcilable or not; if irreconcilable, they are independent. A space possessing 
irreducible circuits is multiply connected; if it has none, it is simply connected. 
It is doubly 2 connected if there is one independent irreducible circuit; triply 
connected if there are two; and so on. 
1 In the space Q, we would demand smoothness of class C2 : q~foqa oqT continuous. In 
QP or QTPH, we would demand a canonical transformation (Sect:. 87). 2 Because there are then two essentially different ways of passing from one point to another. 
104 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 63. 
The surface of a sphere is simply connected 1 ; the circumference of a circle, or the 
surface of a cylinder, is doubly connected; the surface of a torus is triply connected. 
If, for a cylinder, we treat the azimuthal angle q; as a cyclic coordinate, and 
measure z along the generators, a reducible circuit appears 2 as r in Fig. 31, and 
an irreducible circuit as T'. 
Motion in a reducible circuit is called a libration; motion in an irreducible 
circuit is called a rotation. 
For a rigid body moving in ordinary space, the configuration space is of six 
dimensions. Let (~. 'YJ, C) be the rectangular Cartesian coordinates of some base 
point selected in the body. The configuration space of the free body is the product of two 3-spaces; in the first of these the coordinates are (~. q, C), and it has 
r Euclidean topology; a point in the second 
r' r' 
corresponds to a configuration of a rigid body 
with a fixed point. This second space is the 
space of rotations. 
The usual way of handling the space of 
rotations in dynamics is to use the Eulerian 
angles f), q;, 1p of Sect. 11, treating q; and 1p as 
cyclic coordinates, so that we have a space Q' 
in which (if q; and 1p are regarded as rectangular Cartesians) the congruent points at 
¥ the corners of an infinite array of cubes of 
Fig. 31. The space Q' for a particle on a cylinder edge 2 :7l correspond to the same configuration. 
(<p cycii~~IJ~ i'::ee;~c~~~~ circuit, The configurations for which f)= 0 and f)= :n: 
are omitted from this representation. 
0 
There is another way of dealing with the space of rotations. By Sect. 10, the 
points of this space are in continuous 1 : 1 · correspondence with the pairs of 
diametrically opposed points on a hypersphere with equation 
.A,2 + ft2 + y2 + (!2 = 1 ' (63.6) 
drawn in a Euclidean space of four dimensions. Thus the topology of the space 
Q for a rigid body with a fixed point is that of a hypersphere of elliptic type, 
in which opposite points are "identified" with one another (congruent points). 
This space is doubly connected, an irreducible circuit corresponding to a complete 
rotation of the body about any axis. 
No treatment of dynamics, with due regard to topology, can be presented in 
small compass, and the above remarks are intended only to introduce the subjeeP. As long as we keep to a fairly small domain in the representative space 
("dynamics in the small"), topological questions do not arise, for we rna y assume 
that small domain to have the simple topology of the interior of a Euclidean 
sphere with the appropriate number of dimensions. This article follows, in the 
main, the tradition of mathematical physics, in which topological questions are 
matters for ad hoc investigation in particular cases; they may be left in abeyance 
until we come to action-angle variables (Sects. 98 and 99). 
1 Nevertheless, for a particle moving on a sphere, there exists no coordinate system in 
continuous 1: 1 correspondence with the points of the space Q. The common practice is to 
treat the azimuthal angle (/! as a cyclic coordinate and exclude the poles, {} = o and {} = n. 2 Only the simplest cases are illustrated; reducible and irreducible circuits may be much 
more complicated than those shown. 3 In the extensive literature of modern topology, it is hard to find any treatment in 
which the physical interest is not heavily overshadowed by the rigour indispensable in a 
purely mathematical argument. But for a sprightly introduction to topology, see R. CouRANT 
and H. RoBBINS: What is Mathematics? Chap. V. London-New York-Toronto: Oxford 
University Press 1948. 
Sect. 64. The homogeneous Lagrangian A (x, x') and the ordinary Lagrangian L (q, t, q). 10 5 
II. The space of events ( QT ). 
64. The homogeneous Lagrangian A (x, x') and the ordinary Lagrangian 
L (q, t, q). Consider the space of events Q T, of N + 1 dimensions and with 
coordinates q1 , ... qN, t. For notational reasons, and also with a view to relativistic applications, let us write 
t = XN+l• (64.1) 
so that the coordinates in Q T are x, (see Sect. 62 for notation). 
Let r be any curve in Q T with equations 
x,=x,(u). (64.2) 
We suppose these functions to be smooth (class C2), and that all the derivatives 
x; ( o== dx,jdu) do not vanish simultaneously for any value of u under consideration. 
The parameter u is of no particular importance; we keep in mind the whole class 
of parameters obtained from one of them by a C2 transformation with nonvanishing positive first derivative, so that all the parameters increase together. 
It is the curve r in Q T, with a certain sense on it, but not with any particular 
parametrization, that is the geometrical object now before us; it corresponds 
to a possible motion of the system. 
We now introduce a homogemous Lagrangian1 function 
(64-3) 
which we shall denote briefly by A (x, x'); we demand that this function shall be 
positive homogeneous of the first degree in the derivatives x;, so that we have 
A (x, kx') = kA (x, x') (k > 0), (64.4) 
and, by EuLER's theorem for homogeneous functions, 
(64.5) 
As regards smoothness, we shall assume the existence and continuity of whatever 
derivatives we may require. Should piecewise discontinuities arise for consideration, they can be dealt with on the occasion. 
In a region of overlapping coordinate systems, A transforms as an invariant 
in the sense of tensor calculus. If the two coordinate systems are x: and x, and 
the two Lagrangians are A* and A, then 
A* (x*, x*') =A (x, x'). (64.6) 
The Lagrangian action 2 along any directed curve r drawn from a point B* 
(where u = u1) to a point B (where u = u2 > u1) is defined to be 
u, 
AL(T) = J A(x, x')du, (64.7) 
1 The present discussion is intentionally kept on a somewhat abstract level, in order not 
to limit the scope of ultimate applications of the theory. The word "Lagrangian" forms a 
link with the more concrete theory of Sects. 46, and hence with physical concepts (Sect. 2). f "'L 2 Unfortunately the simple word action is commonly used for ··~. dqQ (cf. GoLDSTEIN [7], . oqP 
p. 228; WHITTAKER [28], p. 248), and there 1s no commonly accepted name for the more 
fundamental integral (64. 7); it will be called Lagrangian action in this article. 
106 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 64. 
so that AL(T) is a functional of the curve r. By reason of the homogeneity of A, 
AL(F) is independent of the parametrization. The element of Lagrangian action 
lS 
dAL =A (x, X 1 ) du =A (x, dx). (64.8) 
There is, in general, no connection between the action from B* to B and the 
action from B to B*, even though the curve is the same in both cases. 
By imposing an element of action A (x, dx) on Q T, we make it a FINSLER 
space in the language of geometry. If A (x, dx) is the square root of a homogeneous quadratic form in the differentials, then Q T is a Riemannian space. 
The element of Lagrangian action {64.8) may be written more explicitly as 
{64.9) 
By reason of the homogeneity of A, dAL is independent of the choice of the parameter u. Choose u=t; then, by (64.1), 
dAL = A(ql, ... qN, t, ql, ... qN, 1) dt. (64.10) 
Define the function L(q, t, q) by 
L(ql, ... qN, t, ql, ... qN) =A (ql, ... qN, t, ql, ... qN, 1). (64.11) 
Then the element of Lagrangian action is 
dAL = L(q, t, q) dt. (64.12) 
This function L (q, t, q) we call the ordinary Lagrangian function (cf. Sect. 46). 
The two functions, A (a function of 2N + 2 quantities, positive homogeneous 
of degree unity in the last N + 1 of them) and L (a function of 2N + 1 quantities, 
with no such condition imposed), are equivalent to one another, in the sense 
that one determines the other. Given A, we get L by (64.11); given L, we get 
A by equating (64.9) and (64.12) and dividing by du. Thus 
=L(ql, ... qN,t,ql,···qN)t 1 (64.13) 
A(x1 , ••. xN, xN+I• x~, ... x.~. x;,+-1) l 
( X~ XN ) 1 
= L xl, ... xN, xN+l• --, --' ... --,--~ xN+l' XN+l XN+l 
which has the required homogeneity. 
To find the relationships between the partial derivatives of A (x, X1 ) and 
L(q, t,q), we vary x, and x; in (64.13). This gives 
But 
aA ..: aA ..: I I ( aL ..: aL ..: aL ..: . ) L ..: I 
~a~ ux, +-a-, ux, = t -a- uqQ +--at ut + -;;•- uqQ + ut . x, x, qe oqe 
(64.14) 
(64.15) 
Substituting this in (64.14), writing he for c5qe, h~ for c5q~, c5x;_,+ 1 forM, and 
equating the coefficients of the 2N + 2 independent differentials c5 x,, c5 x;, we get 
~=tl_aL_ 
axe aqe ' 
aA aL (64.16) 
Sect. 65. First form of HAMILTON's principle. LAGRANGE's equations of motion. 107 
65. First form of HAMILTON'S principle. LAGRANGE's equations of motion. 
Let r (Fig. 32) be any curve joining B* to B. We vary it to a neighbouring 
curve~ with end points D*, D. Whatever parameter u is used on T, we choose 
the parameter u on ~ with the same end values, u1 , u2 • Then the variation of 
the Lagrangian action is 
t5AL = AL(~)- AdT) l = j't5Adu= j'(:~·bx,+ :~ax;)au. u1 U 1 
Integration by parts gives 
[ OA ]u=u, j"'( d oA oA) t5AL= o;-,-t5x, - -a·-~-,--~- t5x,du. UXy U=Ul U UXy uX1 
Let us now restrict the varied curve ~ 
by demanding that its end points coincide 
with B* and B. The first term on the right 
hand side of (65.2) disappears. If t5AL=O 
for all variations of r to ~' arbitrary 
except for the condition of fixed end points, 
then r must satisfy the EULER-LAGRANGE 
equations d oA oA ~---,--~-=0. (65-3) du ox, ox, 
We may refer to these equations as LAG RANGE's equations of motion, and to the curves 
satisfying them as rays or trajectories 1 . 
(65.1) 
(65.2) 
/} 
The variational equation Fig. 32. Variation of Lagrangian action. 
t5 fA (x, x') du = 0, (65.4) 
for fixed end points, is equivalent to the set of differential equations (65.3). 
We call (65.4) the first form of HAMILTON's principle 2• 
This principle can also be written 
t5JL(q,t,q)dt=O, (65.5) 
for fixed end values of qe and t, and this leads at once to LAGRANGE's equations 
of motion in the form [cf. (46.18)] 
d oL 8L 
it a,z;- oqQ = o, (65.6) 
which are equivalent to (65.3). The expression occurring here is called the 
Lagrangian derivative of L. 
1 The word trajectory links the mathematical concept with the physical concepts of dynamics. The word ray links it with optics, and that may seem out of place in the present connection. But the wave mechanics of DE BROGLIE and ScHRODINGER has weakened the barrier 
between dynamics and optics. If we need the word wave in dynamics, the word ray enters 
naturally with it. Moreover, the present exposition of general dynamical theory owes as 
much to HAMILTON's method in optics as it owes to his method in dynamics, for in his optics 
all the coordinates were put on a parity, whereas in his dynamics the time was privileged. 2 From a mathematical standpoint, (65.3) and (65.4) are different ways of saying the same 
thing. We seem to be indulging in a plethora of verbiage. But words are important, as indicated 
in Sect. 2. The differential equations (65.3) cannot be put into words which are more illuminating than the bare formulae. HAMILTON's principle can: it says that the Lagrangian action 
has a stationary value for a trajectory. These words are easier to link up with physical concepts than mathematical formulae are. 
108 ] . L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 66. 
There are N + 1 equations in (65.3) and only N in (65.6). However, (65.3) 
are identically related, for we have, remembering the homogeneity of A, 
x; (d~t ~:,- --~1-) = d~ (x;~1--)- x;'-::.-- x;~~ = !~- -~~ = 0. (65.7) , r ' , ' 
Provided the Eqs. (65.6) can be solved for q, (and we shall suppose that they 
can), these equations determine a ray in Q T corresponding to assigned initial 
values of q,, t and q,. Then, through each point x, of Q T and -in each direction 
(defined by the ratios dx1 :dx2 : ••• : dxN+I) there passes a unique ray or trajectory. 
We may use the term A-dynamics to refer to theory based on the variational 
Eq. (65.4) and its extremals (65.3); likewise the term L-dynamics for the variational Eq. (65.5) and the extremals (65.6). They are essentially equivalent to 
one another, L-dynamics being a form of A-dynamics in which tis treated in two 
capacities: a coordinate in Q T and a parameter on a curve in QT. We include 
them both under the title Lagrangian dynamics. 
66. Two illustrative examples. LAGRANGE's equations (65.6) form the link 
between the dynamical systems most commonly encountered and the present 
more abstract theory. This theory applies to all physical systems which behave 
in accordance with (65.6), whether those systems are truly dynamical or not. 
The system may consist of electrical circuits, with the generalized velocities 
corresponding to currents. In the truly dynamical domain, the present theory 
applies, by virtue of (46.18), to all holonomic systems for which the generalized 
forces are derivable from a potential function or an extended potential function. 
In such systems the kinetic energy is always quadratic in the generalized velocities, 
and so also is the Lagrangian L ( = T- V) when V is an ordinary potential. In 
the present general theory no such restriction is placed on the function L(q, t, q), 
which is to be regarded as an arbitrary function of its 2N + 1 arguments. 
To illustrate the general procedures, we shall keep before us the two following 
examples: 
rx) R S (relativistic system): We take for homogeneous Lagrangian 
A(x, x') = Vb-. x; x; +A, x;, (66.1) 
where b,,(=b,,) and A, are functions of the x's. This is a generalization of the 
relativistic Lagrangian for a charged particle moving in a given electromagnetic 
field 1 . The homogeneous Lagrangian is simpler than the ordinary one, which, by 
(64.11), reads 
L(q, t, q) = (beaiJ/la + 2be,N+I tle + bN+l,N+l)i + Aeqe +AN +I· (66.2) 
{3) ODS (ordinary dynamical system): This is a holonomic scleronomic conservative system with an ordinary potential function, so that 
L(q, q) = T(q, q)- V(q) = i aeaqeqa- V, (66.3) 
the coefficients aea(= aael and V being functions of the q's. Thus tis absent from 
L. In this case the homogeneous Lagrangian is, by (64.13), 
(66.4) 
a little clumsier than L(q, q). 
1 Cf. Sect. 114. 
Sect. 67. The energy equation !1 (x, y) = 0 and the Hamiltonian H (q, t, p). 109 
It is clear that the theory for RS will be simpler if we use A(x, x'), and the 
theory for ODS simpler if we use L(q, q). HAMILTON's principle reads 
RS: 0 J [(b, dx,dx,)~ + A,dx,] = 0, 
ODS: bf(faeariila- V)dt=O. 
For RS LAGRANGE's equations of motion read 
and if we choose for u that parameter on the ray which makes 
they simplify to 
_d_(b x')+(o~,-~As)x'_i}/)st x;x; = 0, 
du rs s ox5 ox, s ox, 
or 
b "+(oA_,__!As_) '+(~s_obts). ''=O T s xs ~ ~ xs " ~ xs XI . ux5 uXr , uXt uXr 
For ODS LAGRANGE's equations of motion read 
d oT oT 
or 
or •• { } • • a oV qQ + f"QV q,,qV =- ae EJqa' 
where the CHRISTOFFEL symbols are 
[,u v a]= 1_ ( oa'"a +!Java- ~a'"v). ) 
' 2 oqv oq'" oqa ' 
{J'.}= aea[,uv,a], aeaa'"a=b~. 
(66.5) 
(66.6) 
(66.7) 
(66.8) 
(66.9) 
(66.1 0) 
(66.11) 
(66.12) 
(66.13) 
(66.14) 
67. The energy equation .Q(x, y) = 0 and the Hamiltonian H(q, t, p). We 
now make a fresh start. We have before us a space Q T of N + 1 dimensions 
with coordinates x,, expressed in alternative notation as 
(67.1) 
Instead of imposing a Lagrangian A(x, x') or L(q. t, q) on Q T, we impose an 
energy equation 1 
Q(x, y) = 0, (67.2) 
connecting the coordinates x, of a point in Q T with a vector y,. This equation 
may be regarded geometrically as attaching to each point of Q T a surface (of 
N dimensions) in an (N + 1)-dimensional space tangent to Q T, y, being coordinates in that tangent space. 
In a domain where two coordinate systems (x, x*) overlap, y, is to transform 
as a covariant vector: 
* OX5 
y, = Ys ox* . r 
1 The reason for this name will appear at (67.8). 
(67. 3) 
110 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 68. 
This makes (67.4) 
so that this Pfaffian form is invariant. 
For purposes of general theory it is often best to treat all the coordinates 
symmetrically, and then we leave (67.2) in this general implicit form. But we 
sometimes find it convenient to solve for YN+t• so that the energy equation reads 1 
YN+t + w(xl, ... xN, xN+l• YJ, ... YN) = 0. (67.5) 
We define Pv and H by the equations 
Yg = Pe• YN+l =-H (67.6) 
(note the minus sign). Then (67.2) expresses a relationship between the 2N + 2 
quantities qe,t,pe,H, 
and (67.5) expresses Has a function of the others: 
or, if we like, 
H = (JJ (ql, ... qN' t, pl, ... PN), 
H = H(q, t, p). 
{67.7) 
(67.8) 
We make a suggestive link with physical concepts (to be strengthened later) 
by calling H the Hamiltonian and y, the momentum-energy vector; for brevity 
we may refer to y, simply as momenta, if there is no danger of confusion. Since, 
for the commonest systems, the Hamiltonian is equal to the total energy, it 
seems appropriate to call (67.2) the energy equation, since it is equivalent to 
(67.8) 2• 
68. Second form of HAMILTON'S principle. HAMILTON's canonical equations 
of motion. LetT be any curve in Q T joining a point B* to a point B. We define 
the Hamiltonian action along T to be the integral 
(68.1) 
the vector field y, along r being assigned in any way consistent with the energy 
Eq. (67.2). Thus the Hamiltonian action is not a functional ofF alone, but also 
of the assignment of y, along r. 
We now vary r as in Fig. 32 of Sect. 65, at the same time varying y, consistently with (67.2), and obtain for the variation of Hamiltonian action 
t5AH = J (t5y, dx, + y, t5 dx,) } 
= [y, t5x,] + J (t5y, dx,- t5x, dy,). (68.2) 
1 The equation may have several roots, so that w is multiple valued; in that case we concentrate on one of the values. We might of course solve for any of the y's, but for present 
purposes YN+l is best. 
2 In this account of general dynamical theory, I follow the pattern of HAMILTON's method 
in geometrical optics, which is essentially the same as his dynamical method, but more 
compact, because more symmetrical. To gain this compactness, one treats the coordinates q~ 
on a parity with the time t, and the momenta Pe on a parity with the negative of the Hamiltonian, -H. This symmetry is present, in thought if not in notation, in E. GARTAN, Le~ons 
sur les invariants integraux (Paris: Hermann 1922); one meets it also in LANCzos [15], 
pp. 185-192, and in GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 243. LANczos uses the name auxiliary condition for 
(67.2) above. In HAMILTON's optics, this equation is the equation of the surface of components 
and the quantities y, are the components of normal slowness; cf. W. R. HAMILTON: Mathematical Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 291, 303 (Cambridge: University Press 1931). For modern general 
treatments of geometrical optics, see C. CARATHEODORY: Geometrische Optik (Berlin: Springer 
1937), or, following HAMILToN's ideas more closely, J. L. SYNGE: J. Opt. Soc. Amer. 27, 
75-82 (1937). 
Sect. 68. Second form of HAMILTON's principle. 
Since Q = o for F and for the varied curve, we have 
(JQ = .fl!! (Jx + _B_!J_ (Jy = 0. 
ox, r oy, r 
If we hold the end points fixed, then (68.2) becomes 
bAH= J (by,dx,- bx, dy,). 
111 
(68.)) 
(68.4) 
In view of the side condition (68.3), a curve of stationary Hamiltonian action, 
i.e. a curve satisfying 
(J Jy,dx,= 0, Q(x, y) = 0, 
with fixed end points, satisfies the equations 
oQ 
dx, = dw a ' 
Yr 
8Q dy =- dw ··- - r ox, ' 
(68.5) 
(68.6) 
where dw is an infinitesimal L_.._GRANGE multiplier. Hence the extremal satisfies 
the differential equations 
dx, oQ 
dw oy, ' 
dy, 
dw 
C.Q (68.7) -ax:· 
We call (68.5) the second form of HAMILTON's principle and {68.7) HAMILTON's 
equations of motion. Equations of this form are called canonical. 
A curve, with attached vectors y,, satisfying this principle (or, equivale11:tly, 
these differential equations), we call a ray or trajectory; the curve in Q T and 
the associated vector field on it are described by equations of the form 
x, = x, (w), Yr = y, (w) . (68.8) 
These functions are determined by (68.7) if initial values of the x's and the y's 
are assigned. 
The parameter w in (68.7) is a special parameter in the sense that it cannot 
be changed once the function Q has been assigned; for the element of Hamiltonian 
action is 
dx, oQ dAH= y,dx,= y,-d dw = Y,-;;;--dw, W uy, (68.9) 
and this determines dw. But, of course, a relationship may be expressed by 
different equations, and if we change from an equation Q = 0 to an equation 
Q* = 0, both expressing the same relationship, then the corresponding parameters 
<>atisfy 
dw* dQ 
dw dQ* (68.10) 
We note that Q = const is a direct formal consequence of the differential 
equations (68.7); for we have 
dQ oQ dx, oQ dy, -·- = ... -·- ---+ ·- ...... -- = 0. 
dw ox, dw oy, dw (68.11) 
The theory presented here is fundamental and we shall express it in the 
unsymmetrical notation also. HAMILTON's principle 1 ( 68. 5) reads 
(J f (Pe dqe - H dt) = o, H = H(q, t, p), (68.12) 
l This general form of HAMILTON'S principle is due to HELMHOLTZ; cf. LEVI-CIVITA and 
AMALDI [16] II2, p. 559-
112 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 68. 
with fixed end points in QT. The general variation of this integral is 
But 
(68.14) 
and so 
bA8 = [Pe bqe- H bt] + J {aPe (dqe- ~~ dt)- ) 
- bqe (dPe + -~~ dt) + bt (dH- ~~ dt)}. 
(68.15) 
The first term on the right hand side vanishes for fixed end points, the variations 
bq , ape, bt remaining arbitrary on the rest of r. Hence the variational equation 
(6S.12) leads to HAMILTON's equations of motion for the rays or trajectories in 
the form 
. oH . oH (68 6) 
qe = --p~' PQ=- -
8-q;, .1 
agreeing with (47.7). Like (68.7), these equations are canonical. We get also 
dH 
dt 
oH 
ot · (68.17) 
This tells us that H is constant along a ray or trajectory if t is absent from the function H(q, t, p) (conservative system, cf. Sect. 62). 
We may use the term Q-dynamics to indicate theory based on (68.5) and 
H-dynamics for theory based on (68.12). They are different ways of looking 
at the same thing, and we include them both under the title Hamiltonian dynamics. 
The relative advantages and disadvantages of these two aspects of Hamiltonian dynamics are closely analogous to the relative advantages and disadvantages 
of expressing the equation of a surface in the two forms f (x, y, z) = 0 and z = f (x, y); although, to improve the analogy, one should think of an even number 
of variables. Q-dynamics seems preferable for general arguments in which it 
is desirable to put all the 2N +2 quantities on the same footing, whereas Hdynamics is in many ways preferable from an analytical standpoint Thus, the 
equations of motion (68.16) present themselves clearly as a system of order 2N 
(2N equations, each of the first order), whereas in (68.7) we see a system apparently 
of order 2N + 2. This latter order is reduced to 2N + 1 by dividing all the equations by dxN+1fdw, so that xN+l (the time) becomes the independent variable, 
and the energy equation Q (x, y) = 0 implies the further reduction of order to 2N. 
We shall return to the question of order in Sect. 91. 
Comparing (68.7) with (68.16), we see that in H-dynamics the special parameter w is the timet. In Q-dynamics, w has in general no simple physical meaning, but if we use the equation Q (x, y) = 0 to make Q + 1 homogeneous of degree 
unity in the y's, so that we have 
(JQ 0 
Y -- = y -- - (Q + 1) = Q + 1 = 1 ' oy, ' oy, ' (68.18) 
then it follows from (68.9) that w is the Hamiltonian action A8 . In his optical 
work HAMILTON adopted this homogenization as standard procedure, but it 
will not be used in this article because it is more convenient to leave the form 
of the function Q (x, y) unrestricted. 
Sect. 69. Equivalence of Langrangian dynamics and Hamiltonian dynamics. 113 
69. Equivalence of Lagrangian dynamics and Hamiltonian dynamics. We 
understand Lagrangian dynamics to be the theory of Sects. 64 and 65, based on 
a homogeneous Lagrangian A (x, x') or an ordinary Lagrangian L(q, t, q); and 
Hamiltonian dynamics to be that of Sects. 67 and 68, based on an energy equation Q(x, y) =0 or a Hamiltonian H(q, t, p). We shall show that these two 
dynamics are essentially equivalent, with some additional generality in Hamiltonian dynamics in the matter of the definition of the momentum-energy vector. 
We shall establish the essential equivalence by setting up a correspondence 
or equivalently 
A(x, x') ~Q(x, y) = 0, 
L(q, t, q) ~ H(q, t, p). 
(69.1) 
(69.2) 
When this has been done, dynamics may be treated indifferently in terms of 
A or L or Q = 0 or H. The correspondence is established by demanding the 
equality of Lagrangian action and Hamiltonian action for an arbitrary curve 
in QT. 
Let us start with an assigned homogeneous Lagrangian A (x, x'), and define 
Yr by . 
(69.3) 
These partial derivatives are homogeneous of degree zero in the derivatives x;, 
and therefore involve only theN ratios x~:x~: ... x;,+I• in addition of course to 
the coordinates x,. Elimination of these ratios from theN+ 1 equations (69-3) 
gives an equation which we write 1 
Q(x, y) = 0. (69.4) 
Then along any curve with parameter u and with x; =dx,jdu, the element of 
Lagrangian action is, by (64.8), 
dAL=A(x, x') du = x; ~~-du = y,dx,. ux, (69.5) 
By (68.1), this is the element of Hamiltonian action dAH, corresponding to the 
energy equation (69.4). Actually, dAH is more general than dAL, because in 
it the momentum-energy vector y, is restricted only by the energy equation 
(69.4), whereas in dAL this momentum-energy vector is precisely specified for 
any curve by (69.3). However, if we vary a Hamiltonian ray or trajectory, keeping the ends fixed, then bAH=O for all variations by, consistent with il=O, 
and therefore, in particular, for by, consistent with (69.3). Thus bAH=O implies bAL = 0, and this tells us that the Lagrangian rays coincide with the Hamiltonian rays. 
The above procedure establishes the one-way correspondence 
A(x, x') ~Q(x, y) = 0; (69.6) 
given a homogeneous Lagrangian, we obtain the energy equation by elimination 
from (69.3), as described. The equivalent one-way correspondence 
L(q, t, q) ~ H(q, t, p) (69.7) 
1 We assume that only one equation results from this elimination; there might be more 
Cf. P.A.M.DmAc: Canad. J. Math. 2, 129-148 (1950). 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/I. 8 
114 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 69. 
may be obtained directly from theN+ 1 equations 
(69.8) 
by eliminating the N quantities qe and expressing H as a function H(q, t, p). 
Let us now start with Hamiltonian dynamics, writing down an energy equation 
Q(x, y) = 0. (69.9) 
On an arbitrary curve in Q T, with equations x, = x, (u), the momentum-energy 
vector y, is to be regarded as arbitrary, except for this energy equation. But 
let us restrict the choice of y,. to what we shall call the natural momentum-energy 
by imposing the equations dx, = {} ap_ 
du oy,' (69.10) 
where {} is an undetermined factor. We recognize here part of the equations of 
motion (68.7). After solving theN +2 equations in (69.9) and (69.10) for y, 
and{} as functions of the x's and their derivatives x; = dx,Jdu, we define the 
function A by A(x, x') = y,x;. (69.11) 
Then the element of Hamiltonian action may be written 
dAu = y,dx, = y, x;du =A(x, x') du, (69.12) 
which is the element of Lagrangian action for the homogeneous Lagrangian 
A (x, x'), as in (64.8) (for the homogeneity of A see below). 
Collecting the equations, we may say that the one-way correspondence 
Q(x, y) =0--+A(x, x') (69.13) 
is obtained from the equations 
x; = {}~Q, uy, A=y,x~. Q(x,y)=O, (69.14) 
by eliminating{} and y, and solving for A in terms of the remaining quantities. 
As for homogeneity, if these equations are satisfied by certain values (A, x;, {}.), 
they are also satisfied by (kA, k x;, k{}) for any k, and this indicates that A (x, x') 
is homogeneous of degree unity, and not merely positive homogeneous. However, 
the function A may have several branches, and multiplication by a negative k 
may involve a change of branch, as illustrated by an example in Sect. 70; only 
positive homogeneity is demanded in Sect. 64. 
Similarly, the one-way correspondence 
H(q, t, p) --+ L(q, t, q), (69.15) 
by which we pass from a given Hamiltonian to an equivalent Lagrangian, is obtained from the equations . aH . qe = fipe • L =qePe- H; (69.16) 
we are to eliminate Pe and express L in the form L(q, t, q). 
We have now established the essential equivalence of Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics. The correspondences are illustrated in Sect. 70, and their 
geometrical significance is explained in Sect. 71. 
Sect. 70. Examples of LAGRANGE-HAMILTON correspondences. 115 
70. Examples of LAGRANGE-HAMILTON correspondences. We consider the 
systems RS and ODS of Sect. 66. 
For RS, we start with 
Then (69-3) gives 
A (x, x') = VE;:·.x;x~ +A, x;. 
8A 
y,= aX'= v 
and elimination gives the energy equation 
Q(x, y) = t[brs(y,- A,) (y,-A5 ) -1] = 0, 
where brs b,m = r5:,.; the factor i is a mere notational convenience. 
(70.1) 
(70.2) 
(70.3) 
If we start from the energy equation (70-3), and seek to recover A, we write 
down (69.14), which read 
X~=-&brs(y -A.), A=y,x;, D(x,y)=O. (70.4) 
Hence 
y,- A,= -&-l b, 5 X~, 
2D=-&-2 b, 5 x;x;-1 =0, 
-& = e vb::-x; x;' 
where e = ± 1 (all square roots are taken positive). Therefore 
(70.5) 
c brs x; 
y, =A,+ -Vb::~,;,~~ , (70.6) 
and we get the two Lagrangians 
A+ (x, x?: A, x: ~ v,b,s x: x:,} (70_7) 
A_ (x, X)- A, x, Vbrs x, X5 • 
Fork >0, we have then 
A+ (x, kx') = kA+ (x, x'), A_ (x, kx') = kA_ (x, x'), (70.8) 
and for k<O, 
A+ (x, k x') = kA_ (x, x'), A_ (x, k x') = kA+ (x, x'). (70.9) 
Thus the energy equation (70. 3) yields two Lagrangians, both positive homogeneous 
of degree unity, but not homogeneous in the full sense, since the branches are 
interchanged in (70.9). 
In ODS of Sect. 66, we start with the ordinary Lagrangian 
L(q, q) = faearlerla- V. 
Then, as in (69.8), oL . . Pe = -atio = aeaqa, qe = aea Pa, 
and the Hamiltonian is -
H(q, P) = rlePe- L = i aeapepa + V. 
If we start from this Hamiltonian, then, as in (69.16), 
. aH p p . qe = bpe = aea a• e = aeaqa, 
and we get L(q,q) =qePe- H = faeaqeqa- V, 
thus recovering the Lagrangian (70.10). 
8* 
(70.10) 
(70.11) 
(70.12) 
(70.13) 
(70.14) 
116 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 71. 
71. Reciprocity theorem. The relationship between Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics is simple when viewed geometrically1. 
Let A(x, x') be a homogeneous Lagrangian and .Q(x, y) =0 a corresponding 
energy equation, obtained by eliminating the ratios x~: x~ ... : x~+l from the equations 
OA 
y,=ax-· , (71.1) 
Consider a space Z N+1, tangent to Q Tat x,, with Euclidean metric and rectangular 
Cartesian coordinates z,. In Z N +1 draw the unit sphere 
S: z,z, = 1. (71.2) 
Consider the two surfaces (each of N dimensions) with the following equations: 
SL:A{x,z)-1=0,} 
SH: .Q(x, z) = 0. (71.3) 
Here z, are the current coordinates; the quantities x, are mere constants, since 
our geometry is at present in the tangent space ZN+l· We shall call SL the 
Lagrangian surface and S H the Hamiltonian surface. 
The polar plane with respect to S of any point z~ has the equation 
z,zi = 1, (71.4) 
and the polar reciprocal of SL with respect to S is the envelope of these planes 
as z; ranges over SL. To find this envelope, we have the equations 
z,zi = 1, 
OA (x, z*) !5 * = O ) az• z, , , 
A (x, z*) = 1. 
(71. 5) z, 6zi = 0, 
Hence 
oA(x, z*) 
z, = q; oz* , , (71.6) 
where q; is for the moment undetermined; but 
q; = q;A(x, z*) = q;zi OA~x~z*) = z,z~ = 1, 
z, (71.7) 
and so (71.6) reads 
oA(x, z*) 
z, = a • . z, (71.8) 
The polar reciprocal of SL is now to be found by eliminating the ratios zt: z; ... : z;+l 
from these equations. But, on comparing with (71.1), we see that this is precisely 
the way in which the energy equation .Q = 0 is obtained. The polar reciprocal 
of SL is therefore SH, and since the operation of finding a polar reciprocal works 
the other way round, we have the Reciprocity Theorem: The Hamiltonian surface 
is the polar reciprocal of the Lagrangian surface, and conversely. This relationship 
is illustrated in Fig. 3 3. 
1 Cf. J. HADAMARD: Le~ons sur le calcul des variations, Tome 1, pp. 7 5, 76, 96, 97 (Paris: 
Hermann 1910); C. CARATHEODORY: Variationsrechnung und partielle Differentialgleichungen 
erster Ordnung pp. 243-248 (Leipzig u. Berlin: Teubner 1935). CARATHEODORY calls SL 
the indicatrix and SH the figuratrix. 
Sect. 72. HAMILTON's two-point characteristic or principal function. 
The equations OA(x, x') 
y, =---ax'- , 
117 
(71.9) 
attach to any curve x, = x, (u) a natural momentum-energy vector y,; conversely, 
given a momentum-energy vector y., satisfying the energy equation, it determines the direction of a curve for which this momentum-energy vector is natural. 
In the process of finding the polar reciprocal of Q(x, y) =0, withy, as running 
coordinates, in the form A (x, x') = 1, with x; as running coordinates, we encounter 
the equations 
x' ={}~Q(~L 
' o Yr ' 
where {} is undetermined; these equations, like 
(71.9), establish a relationship between the vector 
y, and the direction of a curve, i.e. the ratios 
of x;. From the reciprocity of the operation of 
taking the polar reciprocal, it follows that (71.9) 
and (7.10) are different ways of expressing a 
unique relationship between a direction in Q T and 
the corresponding natural momentum-energy vector y,. In (L, H)-notation, these equations give 
(71.11) 
which are two equivalent ways of expressing a 
unique relationship between the velocity qe and 
(71.1 0) 
the natural momentum PQ ° Fig. 33. Reciprocal relationship between the 
To illustrate the above geometry, consider the Lagrangian surface SL and the Hamiltonian surface SH. 
systems RS and ODS of Sects. 66 and 70. In 
RS, take b, 5 =CJ .. for simplicity. Then, by (70.1), SL is a quadric and, by (70.3), 
SH is a sphere with centre at A,. As for ODS, by (66.4), SL is a quadric through 
the origin with equation faeazeza- Vz~+l=ZN+l• (71.12) 
and, by (70.12), SH is the quadric with equation 
(71.13) 
(actually an ellipsoid on account of the positive-definite character of kinetic 
energy). If ODS is a single particle moving in space, then SL is a quadric of 
revolution and SH a sphere. 
72. HAMILTON's two-point characteristic or principal function1• The HAMILTONjACOBI equation. Consider the space Q T, of N + 1 dimensions, and in it a 
Lagrangian or Hamiltonian dynamics; it does not matter which, on account of 
1 In HAMILTON's dynamics there was a distinction between the characteristic function and 
the principal function, a distinction still observed by many writers (cf. GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 283) 
who would regard the function used in the present exposition as the principal function, rather 
than the characteristic function, which is a somewhat less general concept. However, in 
this article we are following the optical method, in which the characteristic function has all 
the required generality, and any attempt to use the two words, characteristic and principal, 
in contrasted technical senses is likely to cause confusion. The word characteristic will be 
used here, the word principal being regarded as an equivalent alternative. It is rather unfortunate that there is still a third word, eikonal, invented by H. BRUNS in 1895, when he rediscovered HAMILTON'S optical method in a somewhat specialized form; cf. W. R. HAMILTON: 
Mathematical Papers, Vol. 1, p. 488. Cambridge: University Press 1931. This word has 
found its way into dynamics; cf. NORDHEIM and FVES [19], p. 127, GOLDSTEIN [7], p. 311. 
118 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 72. 
the correspondence set up in Sect. 69, and we may use indifferently a homogeneous Lagrangian A (x, x') or an ordinary Lagrangian L(q, t, q) as in Sects. 64 
and 65, an energy equation Q(x, y) =0 or a Hamiltonian H(q, t, p) as in Sects. 67 
and 68. 
Let r be a ray or trajectory joining a point B* to a point B. We define the 
two-point characteristic 1 or principal function to be the Lagrangian or Hamiltonian 
action (they are equal) measured from B* to B along this ray. We denote it by 
S (B*, B). It is a function of two points of QT. It may not exist for some choices 
of these points, there being no ray joining them. It may be single valued (one 
ray joining the points). Or it may be multiple valued (several rays joining the 
points). But these refinements will not concern us much. In the case of multiple 
values, we shall concentrate on one of the values. 
The characteristic function is a function of 2N + 2 arguments, the coordinates 
of B* and B, say, xi and x,. We write 
S(B*, B)= S(x*, x) = S(xt, . .. x;+I, x1 , ... xN+I)) 
B . B 
= J A(x, x') du = J y,dx,, 
li' B• 
(72.1) 
or B B 
S(B*, B)= f L(q, t, q) dt = J (pQ dqQ- H dt). (72.2) 
B0 B0 
Here are some remarks about the characteristic function: 
(i) The coordinate system for B* need not be the same as the coordinate system 
for B. A domain of overlapping coordinates (cf. Sect. 63) may intervene. Or 
even if this should not occur, we might decide, for generality, to transform the 
coordinates for B*, and perhaps those for B also, but independently. There is, 
then, a distinction between the notations S(B*, B) and S(x*, x), for the former 
indicates a function of two points (a number defined by those two points, irrespective of the coordinate systems employed), whereas the latter suggests a 
functional form, that form changing under transformation of coordinates. The 
quantity is an invariant (in the sense of tensor calculus) for independent transformations of the two systems of coordinates. 
(ii) Strictly speaking, the transition from (72.1) and (72.2) requires that t 
shall increase monotonically from B* to B. We may therefore prefer the more 
general form (72.1) in case we might wish to contemplate a system "moving 
backward in time", or in case, in some application of the general theory, the 
variable t did not correspond to the physical concept of time, but to something 
different. 
(iii) In general, there is no connection between S ( B*, B) and S ( B, B*), since 
only the positive homogeneity of A (x, x') is demanded. But if we have decided 
that B* and B shall occur in one order only as far as the definition (72.1) is 
concerned (perhaps in the order of increasing t), then we are free to define S ( B, B*) 
as we please, and it is usually convenient to define it as 
S(B, B*) =- S(B*, B). (72.3) 
(iv) If B coincides with B*, then at least one value of the function S(B*, B) 
vanishes. But this does not necessarily imply S (x, x) = 0, because we may 
be using different coordinate systems for B* and B. 
1 In Sect. 74 the one-point characteristic function will be introduced, and in Sect. 79 the 
momentum-characteristic and mixed characteristics. 
Sect. 72. HAMILTON's two-point characteristic or principal function. 119 
In view of what has been said in (i) above, it is wise to use different functional symbols for the Lagrangians at B* and B, and also for the energy equations: 
A* (x*, x*'), A (x, x'), !J* (x*, y*) = 0, Q(x,y) =0. (72.4) 
We shall refer to B* as the initial point and to B as the final point. 
To find how S(B*, B) changes when the end points are changed, we turn 
to (68.2) and delete the integral, since we are dealing with a ray. We get 
~S = y, ~x,- Yi ~x:. 
If the variations ~x,, ~x; are arbitrary and independent!, this gives 
as aA 
7iX = Y, =ax'· r r 
as * a:.·-=- y, r 
aA• 
ax;' . 
(72. 5) 
(72.6) 
On account of the energy equations in (72.4), S(x*, x) satisfies the two partial 
differential equations 
Q(x, -:~) = 0, !J*(x*,- ::-.-) = 0. (72.7) 
More explicitly, the first reads 
Q(xl, ... , XN+l• aaxSl-, ... - oS ) =0. 
OXN+l (72.8) 
These are HAMILTON's partial differential equations; (72.8) ts the HAMILTONJACOBI equation 2• 
If we hold the ray fixed and the point B on it, and slide B* along the ray, 
the values of y, (momentum-energy at B) are not changed. Hence, from the 
first of (72.6), 
(72.9) 
and therefore the characteristic function satisfies the (N +1) X (N +1) determinantal equation 
(!25 
det -- * = 0. 
OX1 OXs 
Let us translate these results into the other notation, using 
By (72.5) we have 
and by (72.6) 
XN-l-l:t, } 
YN+l--H. 
Tt 
as = -H(q, t, p), l _a~ = H* (q* t* p*) · at• ' ' ' 
(72.10) 
(72.11) 
(72.12) 
(72.13) 
1 This requires the existence of rays or trajectories joining all points in the neighbourhood 
of B* to all points in the neighbourhood of B. In exceptional cases, when B* and Bare foci 
(or conjugate points), this requirement will not be met, and (72.6) will not hold. 
2 For JACOBI's adverse comments on HAMILTON's second equation, see C. G. J. JACOBI: 
Gesammelte Werke, Vol. IV, pp. 73, 74; and for some comments on this matter by A. W. 
CoNWAY and A. J. McCoNNELL, see W. R. HAMILTON: Mathematical Papers, Vol. 2, pp. 613 
to 621. Cambridge: University Press 1940. 
120 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 73. 
the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation follows immediately in the form 
(72.14) 
This is the unsymmetrical form (t privileged) of the general symmetric equation 
(72.8). It is in this form that it is chiefly used. 
A certain confusion has existed with regard to the two-point characteristic 
function S(x*, x). It appeared to jACOBI that too much was demanded in 
(72.7), a single function being required to satisfy two partial differential equations. To clarify this point, let us set down the procedure by which the function 
S(x*, x) is determined. We are not at all concerned here with practical calculations leading to a formula for this function. Very few dynamical problems are 
"soluble" in that sense; as far as the mathematical structure of dynamics is 
concerned, it is determinacy of the operations that counts. It is in the sense 
of determinacy that we speak here of "solving" a set of ordinary differential 
equations, and of "finding" the characteristic function. 
The function S (x*, x) is found by the following operations, starting from 
an energy equation Q (x, y) = 0. For simplicity, we shall use the same coordinate 
system for all the points involved. 
(i) Choose a point xi and a point x,. 
(ii) Choose yi consistent with the equation 
Q(x*, y*) = 0. 
(iii) Solve the ordinary differential equations 
dx, 
dw 
8Q 
oy, , dy, 
dw 
8Q 
ox, 
(72.15) 
(72.16) 
for the initial conditions x,=xi, y,=y: for W=O, so obtaining a ray F 
through x:. 
(iv) Giving Yi all values consistent with (72.15), obtain the set of all rays 
{F} through xi. 
(v) Pick out that ray F of this set which passes through the point x, chosen 
in (i). If no such ray exists, then S(x*, x) does not exist for the points chosen. 
If the ray does exist, then 
" S(x*, x) = J y,dx,. (72.17) 
the integral being taken along r. 
The function S (x*, x) so obtained satisfies the two partial differential equations (72.7), with !2* replaced by Q since we are using a single coordinate system. 
73. Dynamics based on a chosen two-point characteristic function. In Sect. 72, 
the two-point characteristic function S (x*, x) was defined in terms of a Lagrangian A (x, x') or an energy equation Q (x, y) = 0. We saw that it satisfies 
the determinantal equation 
()25 
det -~-.- = 0. 8x,8x5 
(73.1) 
In a sense, this is the most fundamental equation of Hamiltonian theory, since 
it holds in this one form for all dynamical systems, whereas the equation of 
energy changes its form when we change from system to system. 
Sect. 74. Coherent systems of rays or trajectories. 121 
Note that the Eq. (73.1) is invariant under separate transformations of the 
variables x and the variables x*. The quantities 
(73.2) 
are, for fixed s, the components of a covariant vector with respect to transformations of the variables x; similarly, for fixed r, they are the components of a covariant vector with respect to transformations of the variables x*. We shall assume 
the matrix (73.2) to be of rank N, this being the general case. 
We shall now show that any chosen function S(x*,x), satisfying (73.1), may 
be used as a basis for dynamics 1. Any such function being chosen, we write 
oS (x*, x) 
y, = ox ' r 
* oS(x*, x) 
y, = - - ax:-- . (73.3) 
Then, by virtue of (73.1), we can eliminate the variables x* from the equations 
on the left and the variables x from the equations on the right, obtaining equations 
of the form .Q(x, y) = 0, .Q*(x*, y*) = 0. (73.4) 
These are the energy equations corresponding to the two-point characteristic 
function S(x*, x); they are different functions because we contemplate different 
coordinate systems for the initial and final points. 
But we do not need an energy equation to obtain the rays or trajectories; 
we can get them directly from S(x*,x) as follows. 
First, given an initial point xi and an initial direction D*, the ray or trajectory 
is given by o2 S ( x~_._!_l_ d * = 0 ox ox* Xs ' , s (73.5) 
where dxi correspond to the direction D*. These equations enable us to express 
the variables x in terms of a single parameter. 
Secondly, given two points, xi and x,, the ray or trajectory joining them is 
given by ~x*, X) + oS(X, x) _ = O 
oX, oX, ' (73.6) 
where the variables X are current coordinates along the ray. 
But it is perhaps most important to remark that, whether we start from an 
energy equation and derive the two-point characteristic function, or vice-versa, 
the equations *- oS(x*,x) 
y, -- ox: (73.7) 
are the equations of a final ray or trajectory passing through the initial point xi 
with initial momentum-energy yi', consistent of course with the equation 
.Q*(x*,y*) =0; in (73.7) the variables x are current coordinates. 
74. Coherent systems of rays or trajectories. The one-point characteristic 
function. We assume an energy equation 
.Q(x, y) = 0, (74.1) 
and now use only one system of coordinates for initial and final points. The 
rays or trajectories satisfy 
dx, 
a;;; oy,' 
dy, 
dw ox, . (74.2) 
1 HAMILTON gave this argument for optics; cf. Mathematical Papers, Vol. 1, p. 170. 
Cambridge: University Press 1931. 
122 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 74. 
Consider a set of rays (Fig. 34) forming a subspace R of Q T, or perhaps 
filling QT, in which case R is QT. Throughout R the first set of equations in 
(74.2) attach a vector field y, to each point; equivalently and more explicitly in 
terms of the homogeneous Lagrangian, 
oA (x, x') (74.
3) 
y,= ox' , 
We say that the set of rays or trajectories forms a coherent system1 if 
l}y,dx,=O (74.4) 
for every reducible circuit drawn in R. It is easy to 
see from (72.5) that, in particular, the totality of rays 
or trajectories drawn from a given point in QT form 
a coherent system. 
For a coherent system, choose any point B<o) in R, 
and let B be any other point in R. Join B<o> to B 
by a curve C and write B 
U(B) =Jy,dx,, (74. 5) 
the integral being taken along C. We suppress the 
dependence on B<o>, because we keep this point fixed 
once for all. Note that, in (74.5), y, is not the natural 
momentum-energy vector associ a ted with C [ cf. ( 69.1 0) J , 
co/Jerenl syslem of' but the vector field given by (74-3) for the coherent 
rllfs or lrajeclories system. By (74.4) the integral (74.5) has the same 
Fig. 34. The one-point characteristic value for all reconcilable circuits in R. This means 
function V(B) ~ jy,dx,. that, if R is simply connected, then U is a singlevalued function of those coordinates which fix the 
position of B. If R is multiply connected, then U is a multiple-valued function. 
Let C1 , C2 , ... Cm be a complete set of independent irreducible circuits. Then 
any two curves joining B<o> differ by a set of such circuits, and we have 
U(B) =U0(B) + nd1 + nd2+ ··· + nmfm, (74.6) 
where U0(B) is one determination of U, 
] 1 =I} y,dx,, ... fm =I} y,dx,, (74.7) 
C, Cm 
and n1 , n2 , ••• nm are integers, positive, negative or zero 2. 
If the rays or trajectories fill QT (forming a congruence of curves), then in 
(74.5) we can give arbitrary variations to the coordinates of B (say x,). Then 
oU(x) 
y, = --8--x-' 1 
(74.8) 
P = oU(q, t) _ H = oU(q, t) 
e oqe ' ot ' 
or, equivalently, 
(74.9) 
and therefore, by (74.1), U satisfies the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation 
D(x, ~~) = 0, (74.1 0) 
1 Or family_· Cf. P. A.M. DIRAC: Canad. J. Math. 3, 1-23 (1951), who remarks that 
"presumably the family has some deep significance in nature, not yet properly understood". 2 The fact that U(B) is multiple-valued when R is multiply connected is intimately connected with rules of quantization; cf. A. EINSTEIN: Verh. dtsch. phys. Ges. 19, 82-92 
(1917); J. L. SYNGE: Phys. Rev. 89, 467-471 (1953). See also Sects. 98, 99; where the ]'s 
are action variables. 
Sect. 75. Waves of constant action. 123 
or, in the unsymmetrical notation, 
~ + H(q. t, ~¥) = o. (74.11) 
We call U(B) the one-point characteristic function of the coherent system of 
rays or trajectories. True, it depends on the point B<0>, but only trivially, for 
a change in B(oJ merely adds a constant to U(B). 
75. Waves of constant action (Lagrangian or Hamiltonian)1. HUYGENs' construction. For a coherent system 
of rays or trajectories, as in Sect. 74, we define the waves 
of constant action (Lagrangian or Hamiltonian-they are 
the same) to be the loci 2 
U(B) = const. (75.1) 
The rays cut across the waves as in Fig. 35, which 
shows the waves W*, W with points B*, Bon them, the 
curve joining these points being a ray F. The action 
along this ray is the same as the action along any other 
ray drawn from W* to W, and is in fact equal to the 
integral J y, dx, taken along any curve in R drawn from 
W* toW, y, being the vector field defined by the coherent w* 
system as in (74-J). Fig. 35. Rays or trajectories in 
In terms of the theory as here presented, it would be QT cutting across waves w•, w. 
meaningless to ask whether the rays cut the waves orthogonally; we have no Riemannian metric in Q T, and the concept of the orthogonality of a curve and a subspace is not invariant under coordinate transformations. This objection does not, however, apply to the momentum-energy 
vector y,, since it is a covariant vector (to make y, dx, invariant, dx. being contravariant). This vector y, is in fact orthogonal to the 
waves, in the sense that 
y,bx,=O (75.2) 
for every infinitesimal displacement bx, in a wave; this 
follows from (74.5), bU being zero for such a displacement. 
The wave W may be generated from the wave W* by 
HuYGENs' construction as follows (Fig. 36). Let B* be 
any point on W*. From B* draw rays in all directions 
in Q T and measure off on them an action 
A = U(W) - U(W*), (75.3) 
where these are the values of U on the two waves. This 
gives us an N-space, say VN, with equation w* 
Fig. 36. HuYGENs' construction 
S(x*, x) =A, {75.4) inQT. 
where S is the two-point characteristic function. TAr is thus itself a wave, with 
B* as source. In (75.4) the quantities x* are fixed (coordinates of B*), and the 
1 For waves in configuration space Q, see Sect. 81. 2 In the language of the calculus of variations, they are transversals, the rays or trajectories 
being extremals. The condition of coherency (74.4) is called the condition of MAYER; it may 
be regarded in a sense as a condition of irrotationality as in hydrodynamics, cf. A. EINSTEIN: 
Sitzgsber. preuss. Akad. Wiss., phys.-math. Kl. 46, 606~ 608 ( 191 7). CARATHEODORY, p. 249 
of op. cit. in Sect. 71, calls the set of extremals and waves a vollstandige Figur. 
124 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 76. 
quantities x are current coordinates on lj,. We shall show that Tj, touches W 
at that point B at which the ray T from B* cuts W. 
First, B must lie on VN, because it is contained in the class of all points at 
action-distance A from B*. Further, if we give an infinitesimal displacement 
bx, to B, transferring it to a neighbouring position B' on W, the action for the 
ray joining B* to B' exceeds A by y, bx, [cf. (72.5)], and this vanishes by (75.2). 
Thus, to the first order, B' lies on Tj,, and this establishes the tangency of V!v 
and W at the point B. 
It is clear, then, that W is an envelope, in the spaceR of the coherent system, 
of the family of N -spaces (75 .4), the value A being held fixed and B* being allowed 
to range over the initial wave W*. Since these N-spaces are themselves waves 
from sources on W*, we have HUYGENS' construction. 
We can, of course, regard the generation of one wave from another in this 
way as taking place in infinitesimal steps [make A infinitesimal in (75.4)]. 
Viewed in finite terms or infinitesimally, we have a contact transformation which 
establishes a correspondence between the points of the two waves, with tangent 
elements associated with the points; a tangent element here means the totality 
of infinitesimal vectors bx, satisfying (75.2) for given y,. 
76. Determination of waves from initial data. Method of characteristic curves 1 • 
In the preceding work, the domain filled by the coherent system of rays was a 
subspace R of QT, or possibly QT itself. Let us now suppose that the rays fill 
QT, or a portion of it, so that they form a congruence. We seek to determine 
the waves from suitable initial data; we wish to solve for U the partial differential 
equation 
Q(x, y) = 0, au 
y,= ox-· r 
(76.1) 
subject to initial conditions which assign to U the value U0 (in general not constant) over a subspace l:M of QT, the dimensionality M being anything from 
zero (a point) 2 toN. The waves will then have the equations U = const, and U 
will be the one-point characteristic function of the coherent system rays or trajectories appropriate to the initial conditions. 
The method is the method of characteristic curves, which curves in the present 
instance are the rays or trajectories. We write down the ordinary differential 
equations 
or equivalently, in terms of a parameter w, 
dx, 
dw 
(!!} 
ay, , dy, 
dw 
These equations determine a unique solution 
(!!} 
ox, . 
x, = x,(w), y,=y,(w) 
if the values of x, and y, are assigned for w = 0. 
(76.2) 
(76. 3) 
(76.4) 
1 Cf. CARATHEODORY, Chap. 3 of op. cit. in Sect. 71, also T. LEvr-CrvrTA: Caratteristiche 
dei sistemi differenziali e propagazione ondosa (Bologna: Zanichelli 1931), or in French: 
Caracteristiques des systemes differentiels et propagation des on des (Paris: Alcan 1932). 2 The case M = o is covered by Sect. 72, and may be disregarded in this work. The 
reader is reminded that QT is of (N + 1) dimensions and that Latin suffixes range from 
1 to (N + 1); cf. Sect. 62. 
Sect. 77. jACOBI'S complete integral o£ the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation. 125 
Let B*, with coordinates xi, be any point on .EM (Fig. 3 7) and let yi be chosen 
to satisfy Q(x*, y*) = 0, (76.5) 
and also (76.6) 
for every infinitesimal displacement in .EM. It is impossible to enter here into 
all possibilities. The conditions (76.5) and (76.6) may be inconsistent, in which 
case no solution U of (76.1) and the initial conditions exists; and even if the 
conditions are consistent, certain degeneracies may occur. We shall merely follow 
a general argument, asserting that (76.5) and (76.6) contain M + 1 conditions, 
and hence leave Yi with N- M degrees of 
freedom. We use xi and yi as initial values 
for (76. 3). From the first of (76. 3), these 
values determine a direction in Q T; there 
are ooN-M such directions at each point of 
.EM and there are ooM points on .EM, with the 
result that we get a congruence of curves 
(rays or trajectories) filling QT. 
Let B, with coordinates x,, be any point 
of QT. Through B draw the curve Fbelonging to the above Congruence; let F CUt J:M 
at B*, with coordinates xi. Then define 
U(x) by B 
U(x) = U(x*) + J y,dx,, (76.7) 
B• 
y,. 
wOYe: ll ~ const 
the term U(x*) being the assigned value U0 
and the integration being along r. On varying B, and consequently B*, we get 
Fig. 37. Waves in Q T obtained from initial data by 
the method of characteristic curves. 
CJU(x) = CJU(x*) + y, Clx,- Yi Clxi + J (Cly, dx,- Clx, dy,). (76.8) 
Now (76.3) imply dQjdw=O, and hence 
Q(x, y) = 0, (76.9) 
on account of (76.5). Hence CJD=O, and the integral in (76.8) vanishes; further, 
by (76.6), the equation reduces to 
Therefore 
CJU(x) = y,Clx,. 
au 
y,= ax, , 
(76.10) 
(76.11) 
and so, by (76.9), U satisfies the partial differential equation (76.1); by (76.7). 
it satisfies the initial condition. Thus the required solution has been found. 
To revert to a point raised in Sect. 72, we are not so much interested here in 
finding a formula for U(x) as in setting up a scheme which determines it, and 
indicates the conditions under which it may not exist. 
77. jACOBI's complete integral of the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation. Suppose 
that we seek all the rays or trajectories, with their associated momentum-energy 
vectors, for a dynamical system with the energy equation 
or equivalently 
Q(x, y) = 0, 
H = H (q, t, p). 
(77.1) 
(77.2) 
126 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 77. 
The plan of jACOBI was not to attempt to integrate directly the ordinary differential equations of motion, but to work with the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation, 
which, corresponding to (77.2), reads 
au ( au) ----+Hqt-=0 at ' ' aq · (77-3) 
He reduced the problem of motion to that of finding a complete integral of this 
equation of the form 
U = ](q1, ... qN, t, a1 , ... aN)+ aN+I· (77.4) 
Here the a's are arbitrary constants; a complete integral must contain N + 1 of 
them, but one can be additive, since only derivatives of U occur in (77,3). 
jACOBI's theorem asserts that, if be are any constants, then the equations 
b = ai (77.5) Q aae 
determine the totality of all the rays or trajectories, and the equations 
a I 
PQ = aqe 
determine the associated momenta; or equivalently that the equations 
. aH 
qe = ape 
and . aH 
Pe =- aqe 
are satisfied by virtue of (77.5) and (77.6), and that (77.5), and (77.6) 
all the solutions of (77.7) and (77.8). 
(77.6) 
(77.7) 
(77.8) 
contain 
To prove this, we note first that (77.5) are N equations involving qo and t, 
and so determine functions qe (t) for any values of the constants; further, that 
(77.6) then give associated Pe. The derivatives of the q's and p's are obtained 
by differentiating (77. 5) and (77.6) with respect to t; this gives 
(77.9) 
and 
• a2 I . a2I 
Pe= 8qeaqa qa+ Fq~at · (77.10) 
Since (77.4) satisfies (77-3), we have 
a I + H (q t ~I) = o at ' ' aq (77.11) 
for arbitrary values of the a's, and so 
a2 I oH 82 I -~ -+ --------- = 0 
oae at ap(} aq(} aae 0 
(77.12) 
Comparing this with (77.9), we see that (77.7) is satisfied. Now differentiate 
(77.11) with respect to qe, obtaining 
--~ I- + _;;_~ + ql-l___~:J__- 0 (77.13) 
aqe at oqe apa aqa aqe - · 
Use (77.7) in this and compare with (77.10); we see that (77.8) is satisfied. 
Sect. 77. JACOBI'S complete integral of the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation. 127 
Since the number of constants (ae, be) is 2N, the same as the number of 
initial values (qe, Pe) required to determine a solution of (77.7), (77.8), JACOBI's 
theorem is established. We may say that any dynamical problem is essentially 
solved if we can find a complete integral as in (77.4). 
If a complete integral of the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation is given, as in (77.4), 
then the two-point characteristic function 
S(qt . ... q'/.i, t*, q!, ... qN, t) 
is obtained1 by eliminating the N constants ae from theN+ 1 equations 
S = ](q .. t, a .. ) -. ](q*, t*, a), } 
oj(q, t, a) oj(q*, t*, a) ---a;;-= ---i~Q---·, 
(77.14) 
The connection between the complete integral and the two-point characteristic 
function is closely related to the fact that a complete integral of the partial differential equation 
D(x _OJ_)= 0 ' ox ' (77.15) 
say S(x*,x), in which x; are arbitrary constants, may also be regarded as any 
solution of the same equation if we take as independent variables the 2N + 2 
quantities x, and x;, of which the second set do not appear explicitly in the 
equation. Whichever point of view we take, we are led to the fundamental 
determinantal equation 
[;2 s det ----- = 0 ox,ox~ ' (77.16) 
as in (73 .1). 
jACOBI's theorem may be treated symmetrically as follows. Let S(x*, x) 
be a complete integral of 
the quantities x; being arbitrary constants. Then, defining y, by 
as 
we have 
and 
Define y; by 
Yr=7fX···, r 
* os 
y, =- ox*. r 
(77.17) 
(77.18) 
(77.19) 
(77.20) 
(77.21) 
Now (77.19) implies the determinantal equation (77.16), and hence (77.21) implies 
a relationship between the quantities x* and y*, say 
D*(x*, y*) = 0. (77.22) 
1 Cf. A. W. CoNWAY and A. J. McCoNNELL: Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. A 61, 18-25 (1932); 
w. R. HAMILTON: Mathematical Papers, Vol. 2, pp. o13-621 (Cambridge: University Press 
1940); also LANCZOS (1.5], p. 262. 
128 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 78. 
If we give to these quantities any constant values consistent with this equation, 
then the equations 
oS(x*, x) 
y,=··ax--' r 
* oS(x*, x) 
y, =- ox* r (77.23) 
define a curve x,(w), with associated y,(w), satisfying (for some parameter w) 
dx, oD(x, y) dy, oD(x, y) 
dw oy, dw ox, (77.24) 
To prove this, we differentiate (77.23) with respect to w, obtaining 
dy, o2 S dx5 
dw ox,ox5 -dw ' 
o2 S dx5 0 = ·-·----- ax: OXs dw • (77.25) 
and the result follows on comparing these equations with (77.19) and (77.20). 
It is important to note that we do not actually need the Eq. (77.22); for we 
require only 2N + 1 equations to define a curve with associated vector y,, and 
we can get these equations from (77.23) by omitting one of equations on the right, 
so that only N of they* are actually involved; they, and the constants x*, may 
be given arbitrary values. 
78. The practical use of jACOBI's theorem. Separation of variables. If, as 
often occurs in practice, the Hamiltonian does not contain the time explicitly 
(conservative system, cf. Sect. 62), we apply the procedure described in the 
preceding section by seeking a function ] as in (77.4) of the form 
] =-Et + K(q1, ... qN, a1 , ... aN_1, E), (78.1) 
where a1 , ... aN_ 1 , E are arbitrary constants. Then, by (77.3), K is to satisfy 
( aK aK) H q1, ... qN,-a-, ... -,- =E. ql uqN (78.2) 
When such a complete integral has been found, the Eqs. (77.5). (77.6) give, for 
the trajectories, the equations 
BK BK BK 
b1 = -,-, ... bN-1 = -,--' bN = - t + "'E ' ua1 uaN-l u (78.3) 
and 
P1 = :~ . · · · PN-1 = a::_1 , PN = :~ · (78.4) 
The first N -1 equations in (78.3) determine a curve in the space Q, and the 
last gives the time t. H has a constant value in the motion (a consequence of 
oHfot=O), and this constant value is E. 
The HAMILTON-JACOBI equation (78.2) may sometimes be solved by separation of variables. Let H be of the form 
(78.5) 
where H1 , A1 are functions of q1 , P1 only, H 2 , A2 functions of q2 , P2 only, and so 
on. Then (78.2) may be written in the form 
Dl + D2 + ... + DN = 0' (78.6) 
where 
(78.7) 
Sect. 78. The practical use of JACOBI's theorem. Separation of variables. 129 
with similar expressions for D2 , 00. DN. We satisfy (78.6) by taking 
K = K1(q1, a1, E)+ K 2(q2, a2, E)+ 00 • + KN(qN, aN, E), (78.8) 
and making K1 , K2 , ..• KN satisfy 
{78.9) 
and similar equations, the quantities a1 , a 2 , ••• aN being constants which are 
arbitrary except for the condition 
(78.10) 
so that there are N -1 of them independent. Now (78.9) is an ordinary differential equation. When solved for dK1fdq1, it gives K1 by a quadrature; similarly 
K 2 , 00. KN are obtained by quadratures, and we have a complete integral of the 
HAMILTON-jACOBI equation (78.2) in the form (78.8), containing N arbitrary 
constants [we recall that an additive constant was thrown away in (77.4) in 
passing from U to ]] . 
Systems of the LIOUVILLE type1 are particular cases of (78.5); for them the 
kinetic and potential energies are of the forms 
T = i (Al + 0 0 0 +AN) (Bl qi + 0 0 
0 + BNq~)' l 
V = T-i + ... + VN (78.11) 
Al + ... +AN' 
where A1 , B1 , v;_ are functions of q1 only, A2, B2, ~ functions of q2 only, and 
so on. The corresponding Hamiltonian is 
H = t(pi/Bl + ... + p'j.,(BN) + J'i + ... + VN (78.12) 
A1 + ... +AN ' 
and the ordinary differential equations as in {78.9), by which the problem is 
reduced to quadratures, now read 
(~~: r = 2B1(EA1- v;_ + al), ... ( ~~; r = 2BN(EAN- ~+aN). (78.13) 
As a simple example, consider the KEPLER problem 2 (Sect. 36). For polar 
coordinates r, {}, we have the Lagrangian 
and the momenta are oL . p, = ---af = r' 
{78.14) 
(78.15) 
(We have taken the mass of the particle to be unity). The Hamiltonian is 
H = r _i~ or + J. (){} ~ - L = T + V l 
(78.16) 
= _1_ (p2 + _1_p2)- fl 
2 ' r 2 fJ r ' 
1 For further details, and for the more general systems of STAECKEL, which also yield 
to the method of separation of variables, see APPELL [2] II, pp. 437-440; LEVI-CIVITA and 
AMALDI [16] II2, pp. 415-424. 2 Cf. CoRBEN and STEHLE [3], pp. 251-257 for a detailed three-dimensional treatment, 
with consideration of the BoHR-SOMMERFELD quantum conditions. See also APPELL [2] I, 
pp. 592-596. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/I. 9 
130 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 79. 
which is of the form (78.12). The HAMILTON-JACOBI equation (78.2) reads 
_1_ [( oK )2 + _1_ ( oK )2]- 1!... = E (78.17) 
2 or r 2 (Jf} r ' 
and we obtain a complete integral in the form 
K = F(r, a, E)+ a{}, (78.18) 
where a and E are arbitrary constants, and F is given by a quadrature from 
~)2 = 2£ + 3:!!_ __ a2 . dr . r r2 (78.19) 
By (78.3) the trajectories have the equations 
dF oF 
bl = aa + {}, b2 = - t + a E- . (78.20) 
It is obvious that the above method can be used when the potential is any function of r. 
Separation of variables demands a special choice of coordinates. Thus, in 
the KEPLER problem, rectangular Cartesians would not do. In the problem of 
two centres of attraction, the variables may be separated (the system being 
reduced to LIOUVILLE type) by transforming from rectangular Cartesians (x, y) 
to elliptic coordinates (q1 , q2) by the formulae 
(78.21) 
the centres being at x = ±c. If one attracting centre is removed to infinity, 
and its strength infinitely increased, we get in the limit the problem of a charged 
particle moving in a field which is the superposition of a uniform electric field on 
a CouLOMB field (STARK effect) 1 . 
The relativistic KEPLER problem is treated in Sect. 116. 
III. Momentum-energy space (PH). 
79. The space PH and the momentum-energy characteristic function. In 
PartE II we took the (N + 1)-dimensional space of events Q T as the background 
for dynamical theory, using the coordinates x, where 2 
(79.1) 
Let us now view dynamics in the (N + 1)-dimensional momentum-energy space PH 
in which the coordinates are y, where 
Ye=Pe' YN+I= -H. 
We start from the beginning, assuming an energy equation 
.Q(x, y) = 0, 
or equivalently, on solving for YtV+l• 
H =H(q, t, p). 
(79.2) 
(79. 3) 
(79.4) 
For any curve r in PH with equations y,= y,(u), we define a new type of action 
by the integral (79.5) 
1 Fora detailed treatment, see CORBEN and STEHLE [3], pp. 258-264; see also APPELL [2] I. 
pp. 602-607; GRAMMEL [8], p. 321; PERES [20], pp. 243, 244. For a Lagrangian treatment 
of the problem of two centres, see WHITTAKER [28], pp. 97-99. 2 For notation, see Sect. 62. 
Sect. 79. The space PH and the momentum-energy characteristic function. 131 
where x,(u) are arbitrary except for (79.3); equivalently, 
A=J(qedPe-tdH). (79.6) 
On varying F, we get 
(79.7) 
If we hold the end points of r fixed (i.e. the end values of y,), the variational 
equation <5A = <5 J x, dy' = 0, (79.8) 
with the side condition (79-3), leads at once to the canonical equations 
dx, oQ dy, oQ ( ) 
dw oy, ' dw - ox, ' 79.9 
for some parameter w. These are the same equations as in (68.7), and we may 
call the curves satisfying them rays or trajectories as before. 
It is clear then that dynamics in PH based on the energy equation (79.3) 
and the variational equation (79.8) is the same as the dynamics in Q T based on 
the same energy equation and HAMILTON's principle (68.5), i.e. 
<5A = <5fy,dx,= 0, (79.10) 
for fixed end points in QT. The two actions are connected by 
A +A= J y,dx.+ f x,dy, } 
= x,y,- xiyi, (79.11) 
where (x*, y*) refer to the initial point and (x, y) to the final point. In Q T 
we think of x, as current coordinates on a curve and y, as an associated vector 
field; in PH, we reverse the roles. There is a formal duality between the two 
representations; we could, for example, use the technique of Sect. 69 to define 
a ''homogeneous Lagrangian" in PH as a function of the quantities y and y' 
(where y;=dy,fdu), and pac;s to an "ordinary Lagrangian", a function of Pe' 
H and dpefdH. 
We now introduce in PH the momentum-energy characteristic function 1 W(C*, C) 
defined by W(C*, C)= f x, dy,, (79.12) 
the integral being taken along the ray or trajectory joining the points C* and C 
of PH. On varying these end points, we get from (79.7) 
(79.13) 
If the variations <5y, and <5yi can be taken arbitrarily (i.e. if there are rays 
joining arbitrarily varied positions of C* and C), then 
ow ow * -oy,- = x,, &;,; =- x,, (79.14) 
and hence, by (79.3), W(y*, y) satisfies the partial differential equations 
n(-~~-. y) = o, n(- :; , y*) = o. (79.15) 
The values of xi and x, define a ray or trajectory, and hence they determine Yi 
and y,; conversely, the values of Yi and y, in general define a ray or trajectory, 
1 In optics, this is HAMILTON's T-function, also known as angle-characteristic and angleeikonal; it is the basis of the theory of the aberrations of optical instruments. It is denoted 
by Where to avoid confusion with kinetic energy. 
9* 
132 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 80. 
and hence they determine x: and x,. The relationship between the two-point 
characteristic function S ( x*, x) and the momentum-energy characteristic function W(y*, y) is 
W(y*, y) + S(x*, x) = x,y,- x;y;. (79.16) 
In addition to these two characteristic functions, there are two other mixed 
characteristic functions: 
and 
F(x*, y) = S(x*, x)- x, y,, 
G(x, y*) = S(x*, x) + x;y;. 
(79.17) 
(79.18) 
If arbitrary variations are permissible, we have 
and 
oF_ * 
ox* --Y,' T 
oG 
·a-x= y,, , 
oF 
-0- =- x,, y, 
oG * ~=x,. y, 
(79.19) 
(79.20) 
80. Encounters. We assumed, following (79.13), 
that C* and C can be given arbitrary displacements 
tJy; and tly, in PH, but there are important cases 
where this cannot be done. Let us consider a ray 
or trajectory F in Q T, joining a point B* to a 
point B (Fig. 38). Suppose that in a domain M* of 
Q T, containing B*, the function D(x, y) is independent of its first set of arguments, the x's, and 
that the same is true in a domain M containing B. 
We then write the energy equation 
D*(y*) = o in M*, .Q(y) = 0 in M. (80.1) 
Fig.38.Arayortrajectoryinevent-space By (79.9), the y's are constant along a ray in M* 
Q T with straight initial and final portions. 
or in M, and in fact the ray is a straight line in 
each of these domains of QT. It is clear from (80.1) that y; and y, cannot 
be given independent variations. 
Solving (80.1), we get 
y;+l =-w* (Yt, ... y;), 
or equivalently 
H*=H*(p*), H=H(p). 
(80.2) 
(80.3) 
We are in fact dealing with a system for which, initially and finally, the Hamiltonian depends only on the momenta, as is the case for a free particle or a set 
of free particles without interactions between them. Now (79.13) gives 
Jtw-( 0(}))1: ( * * ow·)Jt * u - X~- XN+l oy~ uy~- X~ - XN+l oy3 uVQ, 
which shows that W is a function only of the 2N quantities y~, y:. 
notation, W is a function only of p~, p;, and (80.4) reads 
tlW=(qQ-t !~)t1Pe-(q:-t* ~;;)tlp:. 
(80.4) 
In the other 
(80.5) 
Under these circumstances W is to be regarded as an arbitrary function of its 
2N arguments, and is not required to satisfy any partial differential equation 
Sect. 80. Encounters. 133 
as in (79.15). Since Pe• P: can be given arbitrary independent variations, (80.5) 
gives 
;:: = - q: + t* ~~; ' ) 
ow oH (80.6) 
ope = qe - t ope . 
Regarding the function W as assigned, these are the equations of the initial 
and final rays or trajectories, the momenta Pe, P: having constant values by 
virtue of the canonical equations (79.9). When viewed in Q T, these initial and 
final rays are straight lines; when viewed in PH, they are mere points, each lying 
on a certain surface of N dimensions, as given in (80.1) or (80.3) (Fig. 39). 
Consider now an encounter, as in the kinetic theory of gases, of a system of 
n particles which interact with one another, the generalized forces being derivable 
from a potential function, or an extended potential, so that the dynamics is 
Hamiltonian. Write ~ = m2 = m3 for the c 
mass of the first particle and q1 , q2 , q3 for 
its rectangular Cartesian coordinates; write 
m4 = m5 = m6 for the mass of the second 
particle and q4 , q5 , q6 for its coordinates; and 
so on. Then the Lagrangian is 
N 
L = i L mA q~ - V(q, q), (80.7) 
A=l 
where N = 3 n. We suppose that V is a func- SJ*(y *) -o 
tion of the positions and, perhaps, the Velo- Fig. 39. Encounter viewed in momentum-energy 
cities of the particles, vanishing when the dis- space PH. ~~~~:((~ :'~i~:~';!!~~~ point c• and 
tances between the particles tend to infinity. 
Let the particles start at infinite distances from one another, approach, interact, and finally withdraw to infinite distances again. To avoid the awkward 
limits, t-+ ± oo, let us suppose that the interactions are completely absent for 
t < t't and for t > t0 , being switched on and off as smoothly as we like. This means 
that we modify (80.7) by writing V(q, t, q) for V(q, q), with the understanding 
that V = 0 except for t't < t < t0 • Then for the initial and final states we have 
the energy equations N 
A;l (80.8) 
H*=i1:m;;t 1 P1 2 for t*<t't, I 
H = i L m;;t P~ for t>t0 . 
A=l 
We are now in a position to describe the effect of any possible Hamiltonian 
encounter in terms of a single function W of the arguments 
(80.9) 
in the sense that, if this characteristic function is assigned, then the initial and 
final trajectories are given by (80.6), the quantities (80.9) having arbitrary 
constant values, and the functions H*, H being as in (80.8). 
In view of the axiom of homogeneity and isotropy in Newtonian dynamics 
(Sect. 5), the function W is not completely arbitrary. If p*<1>, ... p*<"> are the 
individual momentum vectors (in ordinary space) of the individual particles 
before the encounter, and p<1>, •.. p<n> the individual momentum vectors after 
the encounter, then W can involve the 6n components of these vectors only 
in the form of invariants under rigid body displacements. Thus, if there are only 
134 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 81. 
two particles, W must be a function of the nine scalar products (the last made 
a sum for symmetry) 
p(1).p(1), p(2) . p(2)' 1 
p*(2). p*(2), 
p(1) . p* (1), p(2). p* (2)' 
(80.10) 
p(1) . p* (2) + p(2) . p* (1)' 
or an equivalent set. 
IV. Configuration space 1 (Q ). 
81. Reinterpretation of dynamics in the space Q. Rays and waves in a coherent 
system 2. The space of configurations Q, in which the coordinates of a point are 
W(t} 
r the N generalized coordinates qe of. the dynamical 
system, gives the most natural geometrical representation; if the system consists of a single particle, the 
representative point in Q is identified with the position of the particle in ordinary space. All that has 
been said in Part E II about dynamics in Q T can be 
reinterpreted in Q. A ray or trajectory, which was a 
curve in Q T, now appears in Q as a moving point, 
the time t being definitely a parameter and not a 
coordinate; the coordinates qe and the associated 
momentum Pe satisfy the Cai_lonical equations 
Fig. 40. A ray or trajectory r in Q and a moving wave of constant Lagrangian 
or Hamiltonian action. In time dt the ray displacement is D D' and the wave 
. oH p eH (B1.1) qe = ope ' e = - aq;. 
But while Q may seem easier to think about than displacement DE'. Q T, the waves of constant action for a coherent 
system discussed in Sect. 75 present a rather complicated moving picture when 
viewed in Q. In Q T the rays or trajectories are fixed curves and the waves 
fixed surfaces of N dimensions, as shown in Fig. 35 (p.123); in Q the former are 
moving points and the latter moving surfaces of N- 1 dimensions, with equations 
U(q, t) = const, (81.2) 
where U is the one-point characteristic function. In Fig. 40, F is a ray or trajectory, and D, D' the positions on it of the representative point at times t, t + dt 
respectively. W is the wave which passes through the point D at time t, and 
W' is the same wave at time t+dt. It is important to note that in general D' 
does not lie on W'; in other words, the representative point does not ride on a wave. 
To explore the relation between the velocities of the representative point 
(the ray velocity) and the wave (the wave velocity), we note first that the ray 
velocity is tie, but that, for a general Hamiltonian dynamical system, there is 
no way of converting this contravariant vector into an invariant speed. To 
investigate wave velocity, we take a pointE on W', adjacent to D, and denote 
the displacement DE by {Jqe; then by (81.2), since it is a question of one moving 
wave, we have aU aU 
oqe {Jqe + fitdt = 0, (81.3) 
1 Often called q-space. 
2 Cf. LEVI-CIVITA and AMALDI [16] II2 , pp. 456-469. For the general theory of waves 
and characteristics, see T. LEVI-CIVITA, op. cit. in Sect. 76. For some interesting general 
remarks relative to wave mechanics, see T. LEVI-CIVITA: Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 39, 535-563 
(1933). . 
Sect. 81. Reinterpretation of dynamics in the space Q. 135 
or, by (74.9), (81.4) 
To follow the usual practice in finding wave velocity, we should take the displacement bqe along the normal to W at D. There is a normal, defined by oUfoqe 
( = Pe), but this is a covariant vector, whereas CJ% is contravariant, and we cannot (in any invariant sense) speak of them as having the same direction, without 
limiting the generality of the dynamical theory. The best we can do is to take 
CJ% along the ray (taking E at E' in Fig. 40), so that 
R bqe = dqe = qe dt, (81.5) 
the proportionality factor R being describable as 
R = ray velocity __ _ 
wave velocity measured along ray 
Multiplying (81.5) by Pe and using (81.4), we get 
R = Pe qe_ = f'_e_ oH 
H H ope' 
(81.6) 
(81.7) 
So far the argument has been of maximum generality. Consider now the 
ordinary dynamical system1 (ODS) of Sects. 66 and 70; for it we have 
T = iae,ijeqa, L = T- V(q),} (81.8) H = faea Pe Pa + V. 
The tensor aea provides us with an invariant kinematical line element ds in Q, 
defined by 2 d 2 _ d d (81.
9) s -aea qe qa. 
It is natural to define the ray speed v by 
v2 = ( '!_~) 2 = a q' q' = 2 T = 2 (E - V) dt e a e a ' (81.10) 
where E is the constant 3 total energy (E = H = T + V). In terms of the metric 
(81.9), the wave W has a contravariant unit normal ne given by 
aea ~l!_ 
ne= oq" Vat-'" au au_ oq~" aq. 
aea Pa ----
lfa~-<•pl-'p: 
aea Pa 
Vi(Y- V) 0 
(81.11) 
To find the normal velocity of wave propagation, we take E on the normal 
to W at D, so that (81.12) 
where d{} is an infinitesimal multiplier, and (81.4) gives 
d{} H 
dt (81.13) 
1 The essential requirement here is the tensor aQa• and this is available for rheonomic 
systems also [cf. (27.2)]; some slight modification of the statements is necessary. 2 This kinematical line element is discussed more fully in Sect. 84. 
3 Constant, that is, for the ray or trajectory F; it is not necessary to take E constant 
throughout the coherent system. For the derivation of the formula (81.14) for the wave 
velocity from the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation, see E. SCHRODINGER: Ann. Physik (4) 79, 
489-527 (1926); Abhandlungen zur Wellenmechanik p. 494 (Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius 
Barth 1927). See also L. BRILLOUIN: Les Tenseurs en mecanique et en elasticite, Chap. VIII 
(Paris: Masson & Cie 1938), and GOLDSTEIN [7], p. 307. 
136 ] . L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 82. 
Hence the normal velocity u of the wave is given by 
2= aeabqebqa = eap p (!_f!_) u dt2 a e a dt 
2 l 
H2 H2 £2 
= aeap;p; = 2(H- V) = 2(E- V). 
(81.14) 
82. Isoenergetic dynamics in Q and its relation to general dynamics in QT. 
Consider a conservative dynamical system; the time t is absent from the Hamiltonian, so that we have 
H =H(q, p). 
Then along any trajectory 
H(q, p) =E. 
(82.1) 
(82.2) 
We shall call E the total energy, since it is precisely that for ordinary dynamical 
systems. 
We now study isoenergetic dynamics (cf. Sect. 62) in the space Q, by which 
we understand that Eisa constant, not merely along each trajectory, but for the 
whole system of trajectories considered, and indeed for those varied curves 
which we have occasion to use. In fact, Eisa constant built into the isoenergetic 
dynamics. 
Let E be an assigned number, and let the system start from a point D* of Q 
at timet* with any initial momenta satisfying (82.2). Let Fbe the curve described 
in Q in accordance with the equations of motion. Then, if D is the position of 
the representative 'point on F at time t, the Hamiltonian action from D* to D 
is, by (68.1), 
AH(F) = J (Pedqe- H dt) = J Pedqe- (t -t*) E. (82. 3) r r 
Consider any adjacent curve I;_ joining D* and D, described in the same time 
interval (t*, t) and having associated with it a vector field Pe satisfying (82.2) 
and approximately the same as on F. Then 
AH(I;_) =fPedqe- (t-t*)E, 
r, 
and hence 
But by HAMILTON's principle (68.12) we have bAH=O, and therefore the trajectory in Q satisfies (without reference to time) the variational equation and 
side condition H(q, p) - E = 0, (82.4) 
the end points in Q being fixed. 
If we now compare this isoenergetic dynamics in Q with the general dynamics 
in Q T, based, as in (68.5), on the variational equation 
bfy,dx1 =0, .Q(x,y)=O, (82.5) 
we recognize at once the complete identity of the two dynamics, save for the trivial 
difference in dimensionality, N for (82.4) and N + 1 for (82.5). The transition 
x,----">-qe, Y,----">-Pe' 
is effected as follows: } 
.Q(x, y) = 0-----">-H(q, p)- E = o. (
82"
6) 
All the theory developed in E II for general dynamics in Q Tis available for isoenergetic dynamics in Q, and we shall discuss some aspects of this in Sect. 83. 
Sect. 83. MAUPERTUIS action. 137 
We note that the timet hasdisappeared from (82.4), so that, if we use nothing 
but (82.4), we can hardly expect the time to reappear. But it does. For if we 
apply to (82.4) the argument used at (68.5) to find the extremals, we get the 
equations dqe _ oH ape _ oH 
dw - ape ' ·a--w· - oqe ' (82.7) 
where w is some special parameter. But we know that the trajectories satisfy 
the canonical equations (68.16), that is 
dq~ _ oH ape _ oH 
""""dt - ope ' """"dt - - oqe ' (82.8) 
and, comparing these with (82.7), we see that, though we chased tout, it comes 
back as the special parameter in the canonical differential equations derived 
from (82.4). 
If we have solved a dynamical problem in Q, obtaining a curve and a momentum field along it, we can use any one of (82.8) to find the time t; or we 
can use some derived equation, such as 
dt=_t~ Pa8Hf8Pa . (82.9) 
There is another way of keeping the time in isoenergetic dynamics which can 
be the cause of no little confusion. This method puts a parameter t on each 
varied curve according to the following plan. Given any arbitrary motion 
qe = qe (t), not in general satisfying the canonical equations (82.8), there is a 
natural momentum [cf. (71.11)] Pe(t) given by 
(82.10) 
where Lis the Lagrangian. By adjusting the parameter twe can satisfy H(q,p) =E; 
then we can state the variational equation (82.4) in a more restricted form as 
f oL . ( oL) t5 oq;qedt=O, H q,aq -E=O, (82.11) 
the variation being for fixed end points in Q, but not for fixed end times, the 
timet on each curve being obtained from the second equation in (82.11). This 
variational equation is more restricted than (82.4) because (82.1 0) is more restrictive than H(q, p) =E. It seems less confusing to work with the more general 
equation (82.4) and restore the time only on trajectories, as in (82.9) or in an 
equivalent way. 
83. MAUPERTUIS action, the two-point characteristic function for isoenergetic 
systems, the homogeneous Lagrangian, and JACOBI's principle of least action. In 
isoenergetic dynamics in Q, we define the MAUPERTUIS1 action as 
A =fPedqe, 
where the p's and q's satisfy the energy equation 
H(q, p) =E. 
(83 .1) 
(83 .2) 
1 Although it is the custom to use the single word action for A as in (83.1), (83.3) or (83.4) 
(cf. WHITTAKER [28], p. 248, GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 228), it seems desirable to have an adjective 
to distinguish this integral from the Lagrangian or Hamiltonian action of Sect. 64, 68. The 
name of MAUPERTUIS appears to be most commonly associated with the integral A, particularly 
in the form (83.4) or m J v ds for a single particle, and will be used here as a distinguishing 
adjective, although historically it might be juster to call this the Eulerian action; cf. DUGAS, 
pp. 250-264, of op. cit. in Sect. 1. 
138 J. L. SYNGE; Classical Dynamics. Sect. 83. 
If we further restrict prJ to be natural momenta as in (82.10), we have 
- J oL . A = 8 .-qedt. 
qe (83-3) 
For the system ODS of (81.8), we have 
A=2fTdt. (83.4) 
Pursuing the analogy with general Hamiltonian dynamics in Q T, we define, 
in isoenergetic dynamics in Q, a two-point characteristic function by 
(83. 5) 
the integral being taken along the ray or trajectory joining the point D* to the 
point D. Variation of the end points gives 
(83.6) 
and hence, if arbitrary variations are permissible, as is in general the case, 
es es * a-q; = Pe• oq: = - P(}. (83.7) 
It follows from (83.2) that 5 satisfies the two partial differential equations 
H(q, ~:)=E, H(q*,-,-:~-)=E. (83.8) 
We recognize the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation in the form (78.2). 
In the timeless theory of isoenergetic dynamics in Q, a coherent system of 
rays or trajectories appears as a set of fixed curves and the associated waves 
as a set of fixed surfaces, two waves being separated by a constant amount of 
MAUPERTUIS action. 
Just as in Q T we can pass from an energy equation .Q(x, y) =0 to a homogeneous Lagrangian A (x, x') by the Eqs. (69.14), so in isoenergetic dynamics 
we can find a homogeneous Lagrangian A (q, q') (where q~ = dqefdu, u being any 
parameter) by eliminating D- and Pe from the N + 2 equatwns 
I - .o. oH(q!..t1_ A- p I H( p) E o q(}-·v op(} ' = (}q(!, q, - = . (83.9) 
The rays or trajectories in Q then satisfy the variational equation 
tJ J A(q, ql) du = 0, 
for fixed end points in Q. 
Let us carry out this process for a system with the Lagrangian 
L( ') 1 • • • V q, q = 2aeaqeqa + aeqe- • (83.11) 
where ava(=aae), arJ and V are functions of the q's only. (This is a little more 
general than the ODS of Sect. 66 and (81.8), for which av = 0.) We first find the 
Hamiltonian as follows : 
(83.12) 
Sect. 84. The kinematical line element. 139 
Then we proceed by (83.9): 
(83.13) 
and so we have the homogeneous Lagrangian for isoenergetic dynamics in Q: 
A (q, q') = v2 (E- V) Vaea q~ q; + aeq;. (83.14) 
The variational equation (83.10) may be written 
15 J(V2(E- V) Vaeadq07ii, + aedq0) = 0. (83.15) 
If we put a0 = 0, so that the system becomes ODS, and use the kinematical 
line element (81.9}, this becomes 
<5JV(E- V)ds=O, (83.16) 
which is known as jACOBI's principle of least action1• 
This may be interpreted geometrically by saying that the trajectories are 
geodesics in the space Q if it is endowed with the Riemannian line element 
(83.17) 
which may be called the action line element. This metric is singular on the locus 
V =E, which corresponds to a state of instantaneous rest for the system, since 
V=E implies T=O. 
84. The 'kinematical line element. In this section and the next, we abandon 
Hamiltonian dynamics temporarily. Consider a dynamical system with kinetic 
energy T = lg0 aqeqa. (84.1} 
Since this work is guided by the techniques of tensor calculus, we denote the 
coordinates by qe rather than qe, since dqe is a contravariant vector. We represent the system by a point in the space Q, which we endow with the kinematical 
line element2 
(84.2) 
already used in (81.9} (we change a to g to avoid confusion with acceleration). 
Before introducing forces, we consider kinematics. Any motion qe = qe (t) 
defines a curve in Q, and at each point of the curve a contravariant velocity vector 
which may also be written 
(8q) 
(84.4} 
1 For other derivations of this principle, see APPELL [2] II, p. 4 54; GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 232; 
PERES [20], pp. 229, 248. Written in the equivalent form d fT dt = o, with the side condition 
dE= 0, this is sometimes called HoLDER's principle. This principle and HAMILTON's principle are both contained in the principle d J (2 T...:.. .A. E) dt = 0, with the side condition 
d(EA-ldtA)= o, where A is any constant; cf. E. STORCH!: Atti Accad. Naz. Lincei. Rend. Cl. 
Sci. Fis. Mat. Nat. (8) 14,771-778 (1953). 2 This is almost the line element of HERTZ (pp. 55. 62 of op. cit. in Sect. 61); he divides 
by the total mass of the system, so as to give ds the dimensions of a length. 
140 ] . L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 84. 
where 
(84.5) 
the unit tangent to the curve. There is also a contravariant acceleration vector 
IJve ae=--IJt ' (84.6) 
the absolute derivative of ve, the absolute derivative of a vector field Ve(u) along 
a curve qQ(u) being1 
(84.7) 
Substitution from (84.4) in (84.6) gives 
ae = v A,e + "v2ye = v .!-11__ A,e + "v2ye ds ' (84.8) 
where ye is the unit first normal to the curve of motion and" the first curvature 2, 
defined by 
IJ ;.e = "' .. e e u 1 ---.. 0 IJs "'• ' geu Y Y = ' ",;;;;, . (84.9) 
Thus the acceleration of the representative point can be resolved along the tangent 
and first normal in just the same way as in (18.2) for a moving particle. 
Since we have a fundamental tensor geu in Q, and its contravariant conjugate 
geu, we can pass from contravariant components to covariant, and vice versa. 
The covariant acceleration is 
_ u _ IJve _ d oT oT 
ae - ge (J a - Tt- dt afi! - aqe. (84.10) 
Passing from kinematics to dynamics, we introduce the generalized force Qe, 
a covariant vector defined by 
(84.11) 
!5W being the work done in a displacement oqe (OW is an invariant). LAGRANGE's 
equations of motion are 
a oT aT 
Tt oqe- aqe = Qe, (84.12) 
and these may be written 
(84.13) 
where Qe is the contravariant force vector. In words: acceleration=force 3. It 
should be noted that, while the physical dimensions of the several components 
ot a vector depend on the choice of coordinates, the magnitude v of the velocity 
vector has the dimensions [M~LT- ] and the magnitude a of the acceleration 
vector has the dimensions [ Mi LT- 2]. 
1 For further details about absolute derivatives, see ] . L. SYNGE and A. ScHILD: 
Tensor Calculus, pp. 47-51. Toronto: University Press 1952. For the CHRISTOFFEL symbols, 
see (18.4). 
2 We might call this geometrical curvature, to distinguish it from the dynamical curvature 
of Sect. 85. To within a constant factor," is the curvature of HERTZ (cf. pp. 74-77 of op. cit. 
in Sect. 61). 3 If Qe = 0, then ae = o, and hence, by (84.8), "= o, so that the trajectory is a geodesic if 
no forces act. 
Sect. 85. Least curvature. 141 
We can form a geometrical picture of the problem of stability as in Fig. 41, 
rand F' being two adjacent trajectories. There are two simple ways of correlating points on them: 
(i) isochronous correspondence, in which we correlate positions with the same 
value oft, the infinitesimal deviation vector being ~e in Fig. 41; 
(ii) normal correspondence, in which the infinitesimal deviation vector 'YJe is 
orthogonal to r, so that 
'YJeve = 0. {84.14) 
Between the two types of deviation vector we 
have the relation 
~e = 'YJe + {}ve, {84.15) 
in which, by virtue of (84.14), 
{} = t;ava {84.16) 2 • v 
The isochronous vector ~e satisfies the equation 
of deviation1 
{84.17) 
r 
Fig. 41. Deviation of trajectories in the 
space Q, with the isochronous deviation 
vector ~ and the normal deviation 
vector "'ll. 
where R~a,... is the curvature tensor of the space Q with metric {84.2), 
R~ap• = a:" {:.}- a~• {a~}+{;.} {T~}- {aT,..} U.} • {84.18) 
and QTa is the covariant derivative of the contravariant force, 
{84.19) 
The equation of deviation for normal correspondence is a little more complicated. Substitution from (84.15) in {84.17) gives, with the aid of (84.13), 
(84.20) 
with {84.14), we have then N + 1 equations for{} and 'YJe. 
85. Least curvature. With the notation of Sect. 84, we define the dynamical 
curvature K of an arbitrary kinematical motion with acceleration ae, in the 
presence of given forces Qe, as the positive square root of 
(85.1) 
From the positive-definite character of kinetic energy, this expression is nonnegative; K =0 if, and only if, the equations of motion (84.13) are satisfied. 
We impose constraints, in general non-holonomic, given by [cf. (46.2)] 
(85.2) 
1 Cf. J. L. SYNGE: Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 226, 31-106 (1926), and Tensorial 
Methods in Dynamics (University of Toronto Studies, Applied Mathematics Series No.2; 
Toronto, University Press 1936). The latter c<mtains a bibliography of work dealing with 
dynamiCs from the standpoint of Riemannian geometry. 
142 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 85. 
The A's are functions of the coordinates and t, and the suffix c takes the values 
1, 2, ... M, so that the constrained system has N -M degrees of freedom. Differentiation gives A,QaQ + B,= o, (85.3) 
for any constrained motion, B, being independent of the acceleration. 
We now ask what acceleration a~ minimizes K, a~ being subject to (85.3). 
If we think of all as rectangular Cartesian coordinates in a Euclidean space of 
N dimensions, this is equivalent to seeking the point of contact of an ellipsoid 
(85.1) (of given centre Q11 and given shape) with a hyperplane represented by 
(85.3)- Differentiating, we see that the minimizing a~ satisfy 
M 
g11 a (a"- Qa) = 1: {},A, 11 , (85.4) 
c=l 
where {}, are undetermined multipliers; but these are precisely the Lagrangian 
equations of motion {46.15), and we conclude that the constrained trafectory (obeying 
the equations of motion) minimizes the dynamical curvature K, when it is compared 
with arbitrary constrained motions with the same position and velocity. 
For a system of particles, {85.1) reads, in ordinary notation, 
K2 =Llmx--;;z+Y--;;+z--;;, "' [(•• X)2 (•• y)2 (•• z )2] {85.5) 
the summation being over the particles and (X, Y, Z) being the given force on 
a particle. With K in this form, the theorem K =minimum is known as GAuss's 
theorem of least curvature or least constraintl. 
For the more restricted case of scleronomic constraints, 
A, 11 v~= 0, (85.6) 
with A, 11 functions of the coordinates only, there is a theorem of minimum relative 
curvature, with curvature understood in the geometrical sense of Sect. 84. Consider 
C, the unconstrained trajectory under given forces Q11 , 
C', an arbitrary constrained motion, 
C", the constrained trajectory under given forces Q ~ , 
all three motions having a common configuration and velocity. As in {84.9) we 
define the first curvature vector of any curve by 
"~ = 15-t~ = "v~ 6s ' (85.7) 
and we define the curvatures of C' and C" relative to C to be k' and k", respectively, where 
k' 2 =gila {"'11- "11) ("'"- ~)' k" 2 = gea {""~- "~) ("""- ~). 
Then k'2- k"2 = g~a("'~- ""~)("'a-~"")+ 2gua(x'~- x"ll) (x""- x"). 
{85.8) 
(85.9) 
From the equations of motion of C and C" we have, by (84.8) and (84.13), 
x~v2 = Qll- vA~ = Q~- A~ Qa Aa, } 
""~v2 = Qe- A~ Qa Aa + Q'~' 
where Q'11 is the force of constraint, and hence 
(""11 _ "~) v2 = Q'~; 
(85.10) 
(85.11) 
1 See APPELL [2] II, pp. 492-497; LANCZOS [1.5], pp. 106-110,; WHITTAKER [28], 
pp. 254-258. For a discussion of the principles of GAuss, HERTZ and JouRDAIN, see NoRDHEIM [18], pp. 62-69. 
Sect. 86. The energy surface and the energy function. 
for the constrained motions C', C", we have 
Acg ).'e = 0' Ace )."e = 0' 
and differentiation gives, at the point of comparison, 
Ace (x'e- x"e) = 0. 
But by (46.15) or (85.4) the force of constraint is 
M 
Q~ = L {}cAce• c=l 
143 
(85.12) 
(85.13) 
(85.14) 
where {}care undetermined multipliers, and it follows from (85.11) and (85.13) 
that the last expression in (85.9) vanishes. We have then 
k' 2 - k" 2 = g~ a (x'e - x"e) (x'a- x"a) ;;;;:; 0 :_ (85.15) 
of all constrained motions with given position and velocity, the constrained trajectory 
has the smallest geometrical curvature relative to the unconstrained trajectory. 
V. The space of states and energy (QTPH). 
86. The energy surface und the energy function. Certain important aspects of 
dynamical theory are best illustrated by taking representative points in spaces 
of higher dimensionality than the (N + 1)-dimensional space of events QT; these 
higher spaces are the (2N + 2)-dimensional space of states and energy1 QT PH, 
the (2N + 1)-dimensional space of states 2 QTP, and the 2N-dimensional phase 
space QP (as always, N denotes the number of degrees of freedom of the system). 
We shall now deal with Q T PH, deferring Q T P to Part E VI and Q P to Part E VII. 
The theory developed for QTPH can, as we shall see, be applied to QP by a 
simple change in notation, provided the system in QP is conservative (oHjfJt = 0). 
In QT PH we take as coordinates 3 of a representative point the (2N + 2) 
quantities qe, t, Pe, H, or, in the notation of (64.1) and (67.6) 4, 
XN+l:t, } 
YN+l- -H. (86.1) 
The variables y, are said to be conjugate to the variables x,. 
A dynamical system is defined by assigning a (2N + 1)-dimensional energy 
surface in QT PH, and confining the representative point to this surface. In 
general we shall write the equation of the energy surface in the form 
Q(x, y) = 0. (86.2) 
To a given surface there correspond an infinity of equations, each of which represents it. If we solve (86.2) for YN+l• we may write the equation of the energy 
surface in the form 
(86.3) 
1 Called extended phase space by LANczos [15], p. 199. 
2 Called l'espace des t!tats by E. CART AN, Le~ons sur les invariants integraux, p. 4. Paris: 
Hermann 1922. 
a We shall work in the small. In the large, overlapping coordinate systems may be 
required (cf. Sect. 63), with canonical transformations (cf. Sect. 87) in the overlaps. 
4 As in Sect. 62, Greek suffixes have the range 1, 2, ... Nand small Latin suffixes the 
range 1, 2, .. . N + 1, with the summation convention in both cases. 
144 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 87. 
or, equivalently!, H = w (q, t, p). (86.4) 
But it is advisable to enlarge the scope of dynamics in QTPH by using an 
energy function .Q (x, y) instead of merely an energy surface. To a given energy 
function there corresponds a unique energy surface with equation .Q (x, y) = 0; 
to a given energy surface there correspond an infinity of energy functions. 
We define rays or trajectories in QT PH by the variational principle and 
side condition [cf. (68.5)] 
b J y,dx,= 0, .Q(x, y) = const, (86.5) 
the end values of x, being fixed. Hence we obtain the canonical equations 
dx, ()Q 
dw oy, ' 
dy, 
dw (86.6) 
where w is a special parameter; these equations of course imply .Q = const along 
each ray or trajectory. The solutions of (86.6) fill QTPH with a natural congruence 
of rays or trajectories, one through each point; some of these curves fill the energy 
surface .Q = 0. Thus the totality of dynamical trajectories, including those off 
the energy surface, present a simpler geometrical picture than what we had in 
QT, where there was a trajectory passing through each point in each direction. 
87. Canonical transformations. The bilinear invariant. If we apply an arbitrary transformation (x, y)--+ (x 1 , y 1 ), the canonical equations (86.6) take the 
form 
dx; X ( 1 1 ) liW= ,x,y, 
d I 
d~ = Y, (x~. y'). (87.1) 
These new equations will be in canonical form only if the right hand sides satisfy 
the conditions 
oX, oXs oy~ = ay; ' ax, + BY, = 0 (not summed). ax; oy; (87.2) 
For some purposes it is desirable to admit general transformations, but particular 
importance attaches to canonical transformations 2 (x, y)--+(X1 , Y1) which preserve 
the canonical form of the equations of the rays or trajectories, i.e. those transformations under which the equations 
dx, oil 
dw oy,' 
transform into 
dy, 
dw 
aQ 
dy; ()Q 
dw =-ox;. 
(87-3) 
(87.4) 
1 In dealing with QTPH it is confusing to write H=H(q, t, p), because then H appears 
both as a coordinate and as a functional symbol. To illustrate this, in ordinary space a 
relation between x, y, z defines a surface. We can write the equation of this surface in the 
form f (x, y, z) = 0 [that corresponds to the general Eq. (86.2)] or in the form z = F(x, y) 
[that corresponds to (86.4)]. It is confusing to write it in the form z=z(x, y) if we have 
occasion to speak of points (x, y, z) which do not lie on the surface, because then we have 
z=j= z(x, y). 
2 In the literature of dynamics, the terms canonical transformations and contact transformations are used almost synonymously. For remarks on usage, see GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 239; 
LANczos [15], uses the word canonical and WHITTAKER [28] uses contact. CoRBEN and STEHLE 
[3], p. 302, use the expression extended contact transformation for a canonical transformation 
in QTPH. For the mathematical connection between canonical and contact transformations, 
see CARATHEODORY, p. 107 of op. cit. in Sect. 71; H. TIETZ, this Encyclopedia, Vol. II, p. 193; 
WINTNER [30], p. 31. In the present article, only the expression canonical transformation will 
be used. For canonical transformations produced in the space Q T P by the natural congruence, 
see Sect. 9 5; for canonical transformations in Q P, see Sect. 96. 
Sect. 87. Canonical transformations. The bilinear invariant. 145 
It is understood that under a canonical transformation (which we shall call CT 
for short) the special parameter w is to be unchanged and the energy function Q 
is to be treated as an invariant in the sense of tensor calculus [D(x, y) =D'(x', y')]. 
We consider only non-singular (reversible) transformations. 
Write 
(
(J;£') (Jz' = lJy' ' (87.5) 
these being (2N + 2) X 1 matrices. Then any non-singular transformation gives, 
in differential form 
(Jz' = J-1 lJz, (87.6) 
where J is the (2N + 2) X (2N + 2) Jacobian matrix 
~ ox' ~~-) oy' J= m " 
oys oys ' 
ax:,. oy~-
detJ =f: 0. (87.7) 
Write 
W'=(:~) ()Q ' 
oy'-
(87.8) 
and use the tilde for transposition, turning a column matrix into a row matrix. 
From the existence of the invariant 
W (Jz = IJQ = W' (Jz' (87.9) 
or otherwise, we see that W transforms according to 
W'=JW, W=J-1 W'. (87.10) 
We now introduce what is really the key to the algebra of CT, the skewsymmetric (2N + 2) X (2N + 2) numerical matrix 
(87.11) 
where 1 stands for the (N + 1) x (N + 1) unit matrix. We note that 
r=-r, det r= 1, f'2 = -1(2N+2)• r-1 =-r. (87.12) 
In this notation the canonical equations (87.3) read 
dz=dw·TW. (87.13) 
We have then, by (87.6) and (87.10), 
dz- dw · rw =J(dz'- dw .J-1 rJ-1 W'), (87.14) 
and it is clear that 
J-1rJ-1= r (87.15) 
is a necessary and sufficient condition on J in order that the transformation having J 
for Jacobian matrix should be a CT. This condition may be written in the 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/I. 10 
146 J. L SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 88. 
equivalent forms 1 
(87.16) 
It follows from (87.16) that detJ = ±1; we shall prove later in (88.29) that 
detJ=1. 
Let <51 z and <52z be any independent variations; then 
~ ( 0 1) (<52::e) <51 z. r. <52z = (<51::e, <51y) -1 0 <52y = <51 x, <52 y,- <52 x, <51y,, 
a bilinear form. Applying the CT (87.6), we obtain 
<51z · r. <5 2z = <51z' .J rJ · <5 2z' = <51z' · r. b2z', 
and so a CT has the bilinear invariant 
<51 x, <52 Y, - <52 x, <51 Y, = <51 x; <52 y; - <52 x; <51 y; · 
(87.17} 
(87.18} 
(87.19) 
It is easy to see that (87.19) is a sufficient condition for CT. This invariant bilinear 
form may be regarded as the basis of CT in the same way as certain invariant 
quadratic forms (dx 2+dy2+dz2 and dx2+dy2+dz2 -dt2} may be regarded as 
the bases of rigid body transformations in space and LORENTZ transformations 
in space-time, respectively. Just as these quadratic forms define the squares 
of invariant elements of length, so the bilinear form defines an invariant element 
of area 
{u, v} dudv = {u, v}' dudv (87.20} 
on the 2-space with equations x,=x,(u, v), y,=y,(u, v) immersed in QTPH; 
here 
{u v}' = ex; . oy;_ ox~ oy; ' ou ov - j)i;" iiU' (87.21} 
these being in fact LAGRANGE brackets (see Sect. 89). 
Canonical transformations form a group. For they contain the identical 
transformation, to each CT (x, y)-+ (x', y') there corresponds the unique inverse 
CT (x', y')-+(x, y), and from (87.16} or from the bilinear invariant it follows 
that a succession of two CT is itself a CT. 
88. Generating functions. Let (x, y)-+ (x', y') be any non-singular transformation, not necessarily CT. Let A and B be any two points of QTPH and C 
any curve joining them. Consider the integral 
I (A, B; C)= f (y,dx,- y;dx;), (88.1) 
taken along C from A to B. Here 
d , ox; d + ox; d x, = -<>- Xs -<>- Ys• 
uXs <~Ys 
(88.2) 
so that the integral is actually of the form 
I(A ,B; C)= f (Xsdxs + Y_;dys), (88.3} 
1 Remember that we have imposed the condition w' = w; if we relax this, a necessary 
and sufficient condition for CT is ./ rJ = p.r, where p. is a scalar multiplier. A linear transformation~= J ~·is called symplectic (or the matrixJ is called symplectic) if J satisfies (87.16); 
cf. H. WEYL: The Classical Groups, Chap. 6 (2nd Edn. Princeton: University Press 1946). 
WINTNER [30]. pp. 17, 29, 45, uses l to denote the matrix r; SIEGEL (p. 9 of op. cit. in Sect. 53) 
uses ~-
Sect. 88. 
where 
Generating functions. 
)( 1 OX; s= Ys- Yr OXs, Y 1 OX; .=- y,--,-. uYs 
147 
(88.4) 
If we agree to keep A fixed once for all, we may denote the integral by I(B;C). 
And if we make B coincide with A, so that C is a circuit, we may denote the 
integral by I(C). Other similar obvious notations are used below. 
Giving arbitrary variations to A, Band C, we get from (88.1), on integration 
by parts, 
tH (A, B; C) = [y, !5x,- y; !5x;]!J } (88.5) + f [(dx, !5y,- !5x,dy,)- (dx; !5y;- !5x; dy;)]. 
Suppose that (x, y)-+ (x 1 , Y1) is CT. Then, on account of the bilinear invariant 
(87.19), the integral on the right hand side of (88.5) vanishes, and we have 
tH (A, B; C) = [y, !5x,- y; !5x;]!]. (88.6) 
A number of consequences follow: 
(i) Since the variation of I vanishes when A and Bare held fixed, I(A, B; C) 
has the same value for all reconcilable curves joining A and B; symbolically, 
I(A, B; C) =I(A, B). 
(ii) If A is held fixed, then I(B; C) =I(B), a function of B only, multiple 
valued in the case of multiple connectivity; we have 
(88.7) 
for any arbitrary variation 1 of B. 
(iii) If A and B coincide, so that C is a circuit and we can write I (C) for the 
integral, then tH (C)= 0 for an arbitrary variation of the circuit. This implies 
that I (C) has the same value for all reconcilable circuits, and I (C)= 0 for a 
reducible circuit. Equivalently, 
(88.8) 
for every reducible circuit; in words, the circulation of action in a reducible circuit 
is invariant under CT. In the case of an irreducible circuit, the effect of a CT 
is to increase or decrease the circulation by an amount which is the same for 
all reconcilable circuits. 
By (88.7) we have this: if (x, y)-+(X1 , Y1) is CT, then the Pfaffian 
(88.9) 
is an exact differential. Let us prove the converse. Given a transformation 
(x, y)-+(X1 , Y1) such that y,!5x,- y;~5x; = tH(B), (88.10) 
where I(B) is some function of (x, y), let us take a 2-space x,= x,(u, v), y,= 
y,(u, v), so that (x, y, X1 , y 1 , I) are all functions of u and v. Then 
OX, - 1 OX; _ _ Of 
y, ov y, ov - ov . (88.11) 
Differentiating with respect to u, interchanging u and v, and subtracting, we get 
{u, v} = {u, v}' (88.12) 
1 This means arbitrary variations of (x, y) or equivalently of (x', y'); the CT may be such 
that arbitrary independent variations cannot be given to (x, x'). This occurs in the case of 
MATHIEU transformations (see later). 
10* 
148 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 88. 
in the notation of (87.21). This establishes the existence of the bilinear invariant, 
and hence the canonical character of (x, y)-+(x', y'). 
We have now three tests for CT: (i) the symplectic test (87.16), based on the 
matrix r, (ii) the bilinear test (87.19), and (iii) the exact differential test(88.10). 
Canonical transformations may be generated as follows. Let G1(x, x') be an 
arbitrary function. If we define (y, y') by 
then 
8G1 (x, x') y,=~-, r 
(88.13) 
(88.14) 
an exact differential in the space (x, x'). But this procedure does not necessarily 
give us a transformation (x, y)-+(x', y'), because we have no assurance that the 
Eq. (88.13) can be solved for (x, y) in terms of (x', y') or vice versa. To examine 
this, we differentiate (88.13), obtaining 
uy,=-~-uxs 
.i EJ2Gl .~: +~ux,, EJ2Gl .~: ' ) 
ux, u.X5 uX1 uX5 
.~: ' EJ2Gl .~: EJ2Gl .~: ' 
uy,= -~uxs-~-ux,. ux, uX5 ux, uX5 
(88.15) 
Let us impose on G1(x, x') the condition 
EJ2G det~ =I= 0. (88.16) uX1 uX5 
Then (88.15) can be solved for (bx, by) in terms of (bx', by') and vice versa. These 
solutions can be integrated, because, if we pass round a small circuit in the space 
of (x, x'), we are led round small circuits in the spaces of (x, y) and (x', y'). 
Hence we get a reversible transformation (x, y)-+(x', y'); by virtue of (88.14), 
it is a CT. 
Thus, starting from a generating function G1(x, x'), arbitrary except for the 
inequality (88.16), we obtain aCT from (88.13) or (88.14). This powerful method 
of generating CT does not, however, yield all CT. It does not yield those CT 
for which there exist one or more relationships1 between the variables (x, x') 
or in particular the CT of MATHIEU 2 for which 
Y, bx,- y; c5x; = 0. (88.17) 
Similarly, the alternative generating functions described below fail to yield certain 
special CT. But to understand the general theory of CT it seems advisable to 
neglect such special cases, and to suppose the CT under consideration such that 
any of the following sets of (2N + 2) variables forms a coordinate system in 
the space Q T PH, in the sense that the variables in any set may be varied 
arbitrarily and independently: 
(x,y), (x',y'), (x,x'), (x,y'), (y,x'), (y,y'). 
The formula (88.14) may be written in the following equivalent forms: 
y, bx,- y; bx; = bG1 , 
x, by,- x; by;= r5 G2 , 
Yr bx, + x; by;= r5G3 , 
x, dy, + y; dx; = c5G4 , 
1 See WHITTAKER [28], p. 294. 2 See WHITTAKER [28], p. 301. 
(88.18 a) 
(88.18b) 
(88.18c) 
(88.18d) 
Sect. 88. 
where 
Generating functions. 
G2 = x,y,- x;y;- G1 ,) 
G3 = x;y; + G1 , 
G4 =x,y,-G1 • 
We have then four different ways of generating CT: 
, i:JG1 (x, x') 
Yr =- i:Jx' • r 
' i:JG2(y, y') 
x, = - - oy~-- ' 
, oG3 (x, y') 
x, = -ay·~ -- ' 
i:JG4 (y, x') X=----
r i:Jy, ' 
, oG4 (y, x') 
y,=-w-· r 
149 
(88.19) 
(88.20a) 
(88.20b) 
(88.20c) 
(88.20d) 
Any one of these formulae gives a CT, the generating function involved being 
arbitrary except for an inequality of the type (88.16). 
Here are some particularly simple examples of CT. First, using (88.20a): 
G(x, x') = x,x;, 
y,= x;, 
i:J2G 
det~=1,} ux.,uxs 
y; =- x,, 
(88.21) 
so that the variables are interchanged, with a reversal of sign as indicated. 
Secondly, using (88.20c): 
G(x, y') = x,y;, 
()2G 
det- 0 0 , =1,} x, Ys 
x, ' = x,, 
(88.22) 
so that this is the identical transformation. Thirdly, using (88.20c) again, take 
()2G i:lfs G (x, y') = /,(x) y;, det -<>-- 0 1 = det- =f= 0, (88.23) ux, Ys ox, 
the functions fs (x) being arbitrary except for this last condition. We get 
y,=~~s y;, x;=/,(x), r 
(88.24) 
so that we have an arbitrary transformation (x)-+ (x') and y, transforms like a 
covariant vector. This is an extended point transformation1• 
In (q, t, p, H) notation [cf. (86.1)], the CT (88.20) read as follows: 
G1 = G1 (q, t, q', t'): 
t =- ac2 
i:JH' 
_ H' = _ i:JG1 } (88.25 a) 
i:Jt' • 
t' = i:JG2 
i:JH'' 
} (88.25 b) 
1 WHITTAKER [28], p. 293. GoLDSTEIN [7], p. 244, calls it simply a point transformation. 
These references may be consulted for further details about CT, with examples. See also 
WINTNER [30], p. 34 and CARATHEODORY, pp. 78-102 of op. cit. in Sect. 71. 
150 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 88. 
G3 = G3 (q, t, p', H'): 
8G3 - H = 8G3 
Pe = oq~ ' ot ' 
t' = _ oG3 ) (88.25 c) 
oH' · 
G4 = G4 (p, H, q', t'): 
t =- 8G4 
aH' p' = ac-~._ e oq~ ' 
The following CT leave the time unchanged: 
G3 (q, t, p', H') =-tH' + g(q, t, p'): 
P' og H=H'-~ e = eq;; · at • 
G4 (p, H, q', t') =- H t' + g(p, q', t'): 
t = t', p~ = ::~-' 
- H' = 8G4_ 
i:Jt' • 
t' = t. 
H'=H-}J_ ot' · 
The following CT leave the Hamiltonian unchanged: 
) (88.25 d) 
) (88.26c) 
) (88.26d) 
G3 (q, t, p', H') =-tH' + g(q, p', H'): 
ag H=H', ' i:Jg Pe = aqe • q~ = ap~ • I i:Jg ) t =t- oH'' 
(88.27c) 
G4 (p,H,q',t') = -Ht'+g(p,H,q'): 
qn = og t = t'- ~ p' og H' =H. " ope ' i:JH ' e = i:Jq~ ' 
The following CT leave both time and Hamiltonian unchanged: 
G3 (q,t,p',H') = -tH'+g(q,p'): 
P og H = H', , og 
e = oqe ' qe = ap~ ' 
G4 (p, H, q', t') =- Ht' + g(p, q'): 
og , P' og q - t=t, - e - ap-; • e - i:Jq~ ' 
t' = t. ) 
H'=H.) 
We shall now show1 that aCT is unimodular in the sense that 
detJ = 1. 
) (88.27d) 
(88.28c) 
(88.28d) 
(88.29) 
Take the CT to be generated as in (88.20c) and differentiate. In matrix notation 
we have by = A bx + B by', bx' = B bx + C by', (88.30) 
where 
A=(~) ox, ox, ' ( i:J2G ) C=~i:J3'. Yr Ys (88-31) 
These equations may be written 
by -Abx=Bby', } 
- ii c5 x = - bx' + C by', (88.32) 
or (-A 1)· (bx) ( 0 B) (bx') - iJ o by = -1 c ,by' · (88.33) 
1 Cf. CARATHEODORY, p. 92 of op. cit. in Sect. 71. 
Sect. 89. POISSON brackets and LAGRANGE brackets in QTPH. 151 
Comparing this with (87.6), we have 
( ~ 1 ~) - C= ! ~) J · (88.34) 
and (88.29) follows on taking the determinants of the two sides. 
89. POISSON brackets and LAGRANGE brackets in QTPH 1• Let u, V be two 
functions of the (2N + 2) independent variables (x, y); the PoissoN bracket 
[ u, v] is defined by ou ov ov ou 
[u,v] =------=-[v,u]. (89.1) · ox, oy, ox, oy, 
Let (x, y) be functions of the two independent variables u, v; the LAGRANGE 
bracket {u, v} is defined as 
{u v} = ox, oy,- i3x, oy, =- {v u}. (89.2) ' ou ov ov ou ' 
In Sect. 97 we shall use the same notation with qe, Pe substituted for x,, y,; 
the following results can be translated immediately from (x, y) to (q, p). 
If u, v, ware any three functions of (x, y), then 
[[u, v], w] + [[v, w], u] + [[w, u], v] = 0. 
This POISSON-JACOBI identity is easy to prove by direct calculation 2 • 
In terms of the matrix r of (87.11), we have 
ou ou 75% ( ov) 
[ u, v J = (a;-,-oy) r :; , ox oy ov ( ox) 
{u, v} =(au-, -a;-) r :~ . 
(89.3) 
(89.4) 
Under an arbitrary transformation (x, y)-+(x', y'), with u and v treated as 
invariants, we have the formulae of transformation [ cf. (87.6) and (87.1 0) J 
( ox) (ox') 
:: =J E . ~:) =J-1(:;) ou ou ' 
8Y -8? 
(89. 5) 
and the same equations with u replaced by v. Hence (89.4) gives 
(89.6) 
1 It used to be the general custom to denote the PoissoN bracket by (u, v) and the LAGRANGE bracket by [u, v], cf. WHITTAKER [28), pp. 298, 299. That no~tion is used by H. TIETZ, 
this Encyclopedia, Vol. II, pp. 194, 195. But in the application of classical dynamics to 
quantum theory, it has been found more convenient to denote the PoiSSON bracket by [u, v]; 
cf. P. A.M. DIRAC: Quantum Mechanics, p. 94 (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1930). Following 
GOLDSTEIN [7), pp. 250, 252, we shall denote the PoiSSON bracket by [u, v] and the LAGRANGE 
bracket by {u, v}. 2 For an indirect proof, see APPELL [2] II, p. 445; NoRDHEIM and FuEs [19], p. 107; 
CARATHEODORY, p. 55 op. cit. in Sect. 71. 
152 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 89. 
If the transformation is CT, then, by (87.15) and (87.16), these equations become 
[u, v] = [u, v]', {u, v} = {u, v}'; (89.7) 
the POissoN and LAGRANGE brackets are invariant under CT. 
Returning to an arbitrary transformation (x, y)---* (x', y'), let uA represent 
the variables x~, ... xN+l• y~, ... YN+l• capital Latin suffixes taking the values 
1, 2, ... 2N +2, with the summation convention. We have then two skewsymmetric (2 N + 2) x (2N + 2) matrices, a PoissoN matrix P with elements 
=[uA,u ] and a LAGRANGE matrix L with elements LA8 ={uA,u8 }. The 
element A C of the product LP is 
Now 
ox, ouB _ oy, ouB _ 0 
ouB oy5 - -8ua ox5 - ' (89.9) 
and hence 
(89.10) 
In fact, we have 
LP= -1, L= -P-1, P= -L-1 . (89.11) 
This relation between the PoiSSON and LAGRANGE matrices is true for an arbitrary 
transformation (x, y)---* (x', y'). Further we have, for arbitrary independent 
variations, 
(<51 ;r', t51y') L (~:::) = <51 UA { UA, UB} <52uB 
= ( ox, _OY_,_ _ ox, oy, ) 15 u 15 u 
OUA OUB OUB OUA 1 ~ 2 B 
= <51x,t52yr- <52xrb1Yr 
(b2;r) = (b1 a:, <51y) r b2 Y 
= (b1 a:', b1y') J rJ ( :.~::). , 2Y 
(89.12) 
Therefore, for an arbitrary transformation (x, y)---* (x', y'), the LAGRANGE matrix L 
is related to the Jacobian matrix J by 
L=JrJ. (89.13) 
For aCT, we have then by (87.16) 
L = r, P = - L-1 = - r-1 = r. (89.14) 
In the above theory of POISSON and LAGRANGE brackets there has been no 
reference to an energy function Q. We now introduce this, and consider a ray 
or trajectory satisfying the canonical equations (86.6). Let F(x, y) be any function. Then as the representative point moves along the ray or trajectory, we 
have 
(89.15) 
Sect. 89. POISSON brackets and LAGRANGE brackets in QTPH. 153 
In particular, the canonical equations themselves niay be written 
~~ = [x,,.Q], ~~ = [y,,.Q]. (89.16) 
Thus the POISSON brackets are intimately connected with the motion of a dynamical system. 
It follows from (89.15) and the PoiSSON-jACOBI identity (89.3) that, for any 
two functions l(x, y) and F(x, y), 
d d-w [!, F] = [[I, F], .Q] =- [[F, .Q], I] - [[.Q, I], F]. (89.17) 
If I and F are constants of the motion, so that 
df dF dW = [I,.Q] = 0, dW = [F,.Q] = 0, (89.18) 
then it follows from (89.17) that the POISSON bracket [I, F] is also a constant 
of the motion (POissoN's theorem1). 
Let us now use the (q, t, p, H) notation, related to the (x, y) notation by 
(86.1), taking the energy function in the form 
.Q(x, y) = YN+I + ro(xl, ··· xN+I• Yt, ··· YN) 
as in (86.3), or, equivalently, 
.Q(x, y) =- H + w(q, t, p). 
The canonical equations (86.6) read 
Thus t=w+const, and we have 
dH ow 
-lit = -----at . 
(89.19) 
(89.20) 
(89.21) 
(89.22) 
On the energy surface .Q = 0, we may substitute H for ro, and the equations take 
the usual form 
dH oH 
dt at · (89.23) 
For any function F(q, t, p, H) we have by (89.15) 
dF _ fJF f)Q +~~-- fJQ fJF -~~~ dt - oxe oye oxN+I fJYN+I oxe oye oxN+t OYN+t (
89.
24) 
_ fJF ow + oF ow oF + ow oF 
- oqe ope Tt - oqe Tie- Tt aii · 
On the energy surface .Q = 9 we may write H instead of w, and obtain 
dF oF fJH oF 
dt = Tt + Tt oH + [F, H]qp• (89.25) 
1 Cf. APPELL [2] II, p. 447. 
154 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 90. 
where oF oH oH oF 
[F, H]qp = oqe oPe - oqe oPe · (89.26) 
If F=F(q, t, p), this becomes 
dF oF Tt = Tt + [F, H]qp• (89.27) 
and if F = H it becomes simply 
dH oH 
dt 0 t . (89.28) 
90. Canenical transformations generated by the canonical equations. The 
basic relative integral invariant. The CT we have been considering are finite 
transformations. To get an infinitesimal CT, i.e. one near the identical transformation, we recall that the identical transformation was given in (88.22); 
accordingly, following the plan (88.20c), we introduce the generating function 
G3 (x, y') = x,y; +F(x, y') du, (90.1) 
the function F being arbitrary and du being an infinitesimal constant. This 
gives the CT 
_ , + d . oF(x, >'}_ , _ + d . oFhil_ Yr- Yr U "x ' x, - X, U " ' ' U T Uh 
(90.2) 
or, to the first order, 
dx = x' - x = du · oF(x.yJ ) T T I OYr > 
d , d oF(x, y) y=y-y=- U·--- r ' 1 Ox, ' 
(90. 3) 
in which we have replaced y' by y in the partial derivatives. If we write the 
canonical equations (86.6) in the form 
d -d oQ(x,y) x,- W· " , uy, 
dy = - dw · oQ (x, 2:'2_ r ox, ' (90.4) 
and compare these with (90.3), we are led to say that the canonical equations 
generate an infinitesimal CT, the increment dw in the special parameter playing 
the part of the infinitesimal constant du, and the energy function Q the part 
of the function F. 
However, there is a change in point of view which may be a source of considerable confusion. Hitherto we have regarded a CT as a change of the labels 
attached to fixed points in the space QTPH, but we have regarded the canonical 
equations as the description of the motion of a representative point in QTPH 
for some fixed coordinate system. This duality of interpretation is present in all 
transformation theory, and we face it by recognizing two alternative interpretations of a CT: 
(i) We have an assembly of geometrical objects (points in QTPH) to which 
different sets of labels (x, y), (x', y') may be attached. 
(ii) We have a Euclidean space E2N+2 with one fixed set of rectangular coordinate axes, and (x, y), (x', y') are the coordinates of two different points of E2N+ 2 
relative to that set of coordinate axes. 
According to the first point of view, a transformation (x, y)-+ (x', y') changes 
the labels on fixed points; according to the second, it moves the points, the space 
Sect. 90. Canonical transformations generated by the canonical equations. 155 
E2N+2 being transformed into itself as a whole. If we putF=Q and du=dw, 
there is complete formal agreement between (90.3) and (90.4); this common 
form can be interpreted geometrically in either of these two ways. 
So far we have considered only infinitesimal CT generated by the canonical 
equations. In the interpretation (ii) above, we see all the points of E2N+2 given 
infinitesimal displacements, corresponding to some fixed infinitesimal value of 
dw. However, from the group property of CT it follows that a succession of 
infinitesimal CT is itself aCT, and we are led to the conclusion that, if we follow 
the points of E2N+2 along the rays or trajectories, with a common value of the 
finite increment L1 w for them all, then the resulting transformation of E2N+2 
into itself is a finite CT. We shall now show how a generating function for this 
finite "CT may be constructed, the integration of the canonical equations of motion being assumed. 
For any curve C in QTPH along which a monotone parameter u is assigned, the integral 
G = J {y,dx,-Q(x, y) du} 
is meaningful. A general variation gives 
(90.5) 
15G=[y,l5x,-QI5u]+ } (90.6) + J (15y, dx,- 15x, dy,- 15Q du + dQ 15u). 
8 
(x,yJ 
(x*,y*) 
Let us seek those curves C for which 15 G = 0 when the Fig. 42. Construction of a generating 
variation is arbitrary exceptfor the following conditions: function G (x•,x, L1 w) in Q r PH. 
(i) The end values x:, x, are fixed. 
(ii) The increment L1 u in the parameter u along the curve is fixed. 
We can put 15 u = 0 in (90.6), and we get 
Therefore the required curves satisfy 
dx, ()[) dy, ()[) 
du oy, ' du ax, . (90.8) 
This tells us that these curves are rays or trajectories, and also that the parameter u on any one of them is the special parameter (u = w). Moreover, from the 
nature of the variational principle used here, it follows that the 2N + 3 quantities 
(x*, x, Llw), chosen arbitrarily, determine the value of an integral 
G(x*, x, Llw) = J {y,dx,- Q(x, y) dw}, (90.9) 
calculated along a ray or trajectory (Fig. 42). 
On giving arbitrary variations to the 2N +3 quantities (x*, x, Llw), we get 
from (90.6) ac ac * 
fu = y,, ox*-= - y, ' (90.10) , , and also o~Gw = -Q(x, y) = -Q(x*. y*), (90.11) 
Q being constant along the ray or trajectory by (90.8). We recognize in (90.10) 
the CT (88.20a), and so we conclude that for any assigned value of L1 w, the function G (x*, x, L1 w), thus obtained by integrating along rays or trajectories, is the 
generating function of a finite CT which transforms the space QTPH into itself. 
We have, in fact, a one-parameter family of CT, with parameter L1 w. 
156 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 90. 
Assuming the integration of the canonical equations (90.8), the generating 
function is constructed in the following steps: 
(i) Take any point B* in QTPH with coordinates (x*, y*). 
(ii) Through B* draw the ray or trajectory C satisfying (90.8) and proceed 
along it until the special parameter w is increased by an assigned amount L1w. 
Let B (x, y) be the point so obtained. Then we have functional relationships 
x,= x,(x*, y*, L1w), y,= y,(x*, y*, L1w). (90.12) 
(iii) Solve the first set of these equations, obtaining 
y: = y: (x*, x, L1 w). (90.13) 
(iv) Calculate the integral (90.9) from B* to B along C, (x, y) being functions 
of (x*, y*, w) of the form (90.12); thus G appears as a function of (x*, y*, L1 w). 
(v) Substitute from (90.13) to obtain G(x*, x, L1w). 
Fig. 43. A circuit C and a tube of tbe 
natural congruence in Q T PH. 
In (88.8) we established the invariance of the 
circulation of action under CT, a result capable of a 
dual interpretation according to the way in which we 
regard the CT. In (88.8) it was a question of changing 
the labels on fixed points. To get the other point of 
view, it is simplest to start all over again. 
Fig. 43 shows a circuit C in QTPH and a tube 
containing C, this tube consisting of rays or trajectories (part of the natural congruence). It is convenient to reserve d for a displacement along the 
natural congruence, so that 
()!} dx,= dw · -
8-, 
Yr 
()!} dy,=-dw·-~-· ux, (90.14) 
We shall use b for a displacement along C, so that the circulation inC is 
u(C) = <ji y,.bx,. (90.15) c 
If we displace c to cl along the natural congruence, we get 
u (C1) - u (C) = du (C) = d p y, bx, = <ji (dy, bx,- dx, by,), (90.16) c c 
or, by (90.14), (90.17) 
in which the integration is with respect to MJ, dw being an infinitesimal scalar 
given along C. 
If dw = const, we get du (C) = _ dw <ji b.Q = 0 (90.18) 
c 
for a reducible circuit. Thus, the circulation of action in a reducible circuit is 
unchanged by pushing that circuit along the natural congruence through a fixed 
infinitesimal increment in the special parameter, and, consequently, for a fixed 
finite increment also. 
As a second conclusion from (90.17), we note that if C is drawn on the energy 
surface.Q = 0 (or, more generally, on.Q = const), then b.Q = 0 and hence du (C)= 0. 
We are not compelled to make dw constant, and therefore the circulation of action 
Sect. 91. Transformation of the natural congruence to straight lines. 157 
has a common value for all circuits (reducible or irreducible) drawn on the energy 
surface which can be deformed into one another by displacements along the natural 
congruence. 
In the (q, t, p, H) notation, the circulation in any circuit is 
"(C) = ~ y, bx, = ~ (Pe bqe- H bt). (90.19) c c 
For a circuit on the energy surface, His assigned as a function of (q, t, p). 
Since 
~ y, bx, = - ~ x, by, (90.20) c c 
the same results hold for a circulation defined as 
~ x, by,=~ (qebPe- tbH). (90.21) c c 
The circulation of action is an example of a relative integral invariant. Integral invariants are defined as follows. 
Let SM be an M-dimensional subspace of QTPH, or possibly QTPH itself, 
so that 1 ;s;; M;:;;;; 2N + 2. Through S M draw the natural congruence, and generate 
from S M a set of subspaces S M (w) by measuring off along the rays or trajectories 
the same value of w from w = 0 on SM; thus S M = S M (0). If an integral I taken 
over S M is unchanged by this operation, i.e. if I for S M (w) is independent of w, 
then I is called an integral invariant, absolute if S M is an open space and relative 
if it is closed (as for a circuit C). Integral invariants in the space Q Pare discussed 
in Sect. 98. 
91. Transformation of the natural congruence to straight lines by solving the 
HAMILTON- jACOBI equation. In Sect. 90 we recognized two different ways of 
looking at a transformation. Let us here take the view that we have a Euclidean 
space E 2N+2 in which there are fixed axes, and a transformation (x, y)-+ (x', y') 
means the displacement of the points of this space to new positions. To avoid 
awkward questions about the topology of QTPH, we shall work in the small, 
confining our attention to a portion of QTPH which has Euclidean topology. 
From this point of view, the natural congruence of rays or trajectories, satisfying the canonical equations 
dx, ()Q 
dw oy,' 
dy, 
dw ox,' (91.1) 
appear as curves in E2 N +2 , and the effect of a CT is to change those curves. We 
seek a CT (x, y)-+ (x', y') which transforms the natural congruence into a congruence of parallel straight lines. 
Let G (x, y') be any solution of the partial differential equation 
Q (X, ~~) = Y~+I• (91.2) 
considered in the domain of the (2N + 2) independent variables (x, y'), this 
solution being such. that 
()2G 
det<>~=f=O. ux,uy5 
Then, as in (88.20c), the equations 
ac , ac 
y r = ex, ' x, = oy; 
(91.3) 
(91.4) 
158 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 92. 
define a CT (x, y)-+(x', y'). For the energy function (always treated as an 
invariant in the sense of tensor calculus) we have 
Q'(x', y') =!J(x, y) =D(x, ~~) = y;_,+l· (91.5) 
Accordingly the new equations of the natural congruence read 
(91.6) 
and integration gives x~ =au, x;.+l = w, } 
y~ = bu, y~+ 1 = k, (91.7) 
where afl, bu, and k are (2N+1) constants, the values of which depend on the 
particular ray or trajectory under consideration. We note that the special parameter w is equal to the coordinate x;.+l, a trivial constant of integration having 
been dropped. Since, for arbitrary values of the constants, (91.7) represents a 
congruence of straight lines all parallel to the axis of x;.+l, we have succeeded 
in transforming the natural congruence into a congruence of parallel straight lines. 
The energy surface Q = 0 has been transformed into the plane y;_,+l = 0. 
By working in QTPH instead of in QT, we are able to present the theory 
of Sect. 77 in a more general way. The partial differential equation (91.2) is 
in fact the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation in a general form. To establish the 
connection, let us pass over into (q, t, p, H) notation, taking the energy function 
in the form 
D(x, y) = YN+l + w(xl, ··· xN+l• Y1• ··· YN). (91.8) 
Then by (86.1) the partial differential equation (91.2) becomes 
~~ +H(q,t,~f) = -H', (91.9) 
if we write H instead of was a functional symbol; we need a solution G(q, t, p', H') 
such that 
(91.10) 
at ap~ at oH' 
We may regard (91.9) as a partial differential equation in the independent variables (q, t), the quantities (p', H') being constants. The first step towards integration is to put G= -H't+ U(q,t); (91.11) 
then U has to satisfy au ( au) ae+H q,t,Bi =o, (91.12) 
which is in fact the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation (77.3). We need a complete 
integral in order to carry out the transformation (91.4). 
92. The order of the canonical equations, and its reduction by means of a 
first integral. We return to the question of the order of the equations of motion, 
raised near the end of Sect. 68. 
Given an energy function D(x, y), the canonical equations 
dx, oQ _dy, oQ 
dW oy, ' dw ox, (92.1) 
Sect. 92. The order of the canonical equations. 159 
form a system of order 2N + 2. If we multiply across by dwjdxN+l' we get 
dxe _ o!Jfoye dye - - o!Jfoxe (92.2) dxN+r- oilfoYN+r ' dxN+r- o!JfoYN+I' 
and 
dyN+r _ o!JjoxN+r (92. 3) dxN+r - o!JfoYN+~ 
This is a system of order 2N + 1; the independent variable xN+l is contained 
in Q. 
We know that D(x,y)=c, (92.4) 
a constant along each trajectory. Let this equation be solved for YN+I' so that 
we have 
(92.5) 
Substituting this in (92.2), we have a system of order 2N, containing the constant c. 
If these equations are solved for x1 , ... xN, y1 , ... YN, then YNH is given by 
(92. 5). Thus the canonical equations (92.1) are reducible to order 2 N; but the 
reduced Eqs. (92.2) are not in canonical form. 
Suppose now that, instead of being given an energy function (which leads 
to a natural congruence filling QTPH), we are given an energy surface with 
equation 
Q(x, y) = 0. (92.6) 
The trajectories are now confined to this surface. We have still the Eqs. (92.1) to 
(92.3) and we also have (92.4) and (92.5) with c = 0. But now we are concerned 
with a surface, and the equation for that surface may be put into different forms. 
In fact, the functional form of Q is not prescribed, and we are entitled to change 
it, so that the equation of the energy surface reads 
We have then 
D(x, y) = YII'+l + w(xr, ... xN+I' Yr, ... YN) = 0. 
~!!___ = 1 
OYNtr ' 
and the Eqs. (92.2) become 
dxe - oQ 
dxN+l- oye' 
(92.7) 
(92.8) 
(92.9) 
This system is of order 2N. When we base dynamics on an energy surface in 
QT PH, the equations of motion can be reduced to order 2N, with preservation of 
the canonical form, if we ( i) write the equation of the energy surface in the form 
(92.7), and (ii) take xN+r as parameter. Note that the parameter xN+I is now 
contained in Q, whereas w was not contained in Q in (92.1). 
The standard translation from (x, y) to (q, t, p, H) is given as in (86.1) by 
Xe=qe, XN+l:t, } (92.10) 
Ye=Pe' YN+1--H. 
But in view of the symmetry in the (x, y) notation, there is no necessity to stick 
to this translation; we are at liberty to permute the suffixes on x, (making the 
same permutation for y,). Thus, in (92.7), YN+I need not necessarily stand for 
- H; it might stand for p1 , in which case the parameter in (92.9) would not be t, 
but q1 . This versatility of the ( x, y) notation should never be forgotten. 
160 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 92. 
In what follows we shall assume that an energy function is given. Consider 
a system which possesses a first integral F(x, y), by which we mean that 
dF = [F .Q] = 0 
dw ' 
[cf. (89.15)], so that F(x, y) = const 
(92.11) 
(92.12) 
along each trajectory. We shall discuss the reduction of the order of the canonical 
equations (92.1) from 2N + 2 to 2N by means of this first integrall, with preservation of the canonical form and of the special parameter w. 
Let G (x, y1 ) be a solution of the partial differential equation 
(92.13) 
satisfying ()2G 
det ~--, =F 0. 
ux,uy5 
(92.14) 
This procedure is, in fact similar to that of Sect. 91, the HAMILTON-jACOBI 
equation (91.2) being replaced by (92.13), and one might ask why we should spend 
our time on (92.13) when a solution of (91.2) solves the problem of motion. The 
answer is that the practical feasibility of getting an explicit solution depends 
very much on the complexity of the function involved (.Q and F respectively). 
It may well happen that F is much simpler than .Q. 
Having solved (92.13), we apply the CT 
ac y,=i}X· , I ac x, = ay_;_, 
and the equations of motion transform to 
dx; 8!1 1 dy~ 8!1 1 
dw oy; ' dw ax; ' 
the new energy function being 
.Q1 (X1 , y1 ) = .Q(x, y). 
We have then 
- 1-=- YN+l =--F x,- =--F(x,y)=O, a!11 d I d ( ac) d 
oxN+l dw dw ox dw 
so that the variable x~+l is absent from .Q': 
If, now, we select from (92.16) the 2N equations 
dx~ 
dw 
oil' dy~ oil' 
oy~ • aw - ax~ • 
(92.15) 
(92.16) 
(92.17) 
(92.18) 
(92.19) 
(92.20) 
we have a set of canonical equations of order 2N, as required; the new energy 
function contains y~+l as a constant. 
If we confine our attention to trajectories on the energy surface .Q = O, we 
can effect a further reduction of 2 in the order. In the new coordinates, the 
energy surface has the equation 
.Q (X~, ... X~, y~, ... Y~+l) = 0; (92.21) 
1 The argument given here, being set in QT PH, has an appearance of greater generality 
than other treatments; cf. NoRDHEIM and FuEs [19], p. 115. See PRANGE [21], pp. 713-726, 
for a discussion, with considerable detail, of the simplification of a canonical system by knowledge of a first integral. 
Sect. 92. The order of the canonical equations. 161 
we solve this equation for one of the y's, say yi.r, and proceed as at (92.7), obtaining 2N- 2 canonical equations analogous to (92.9). Thus, using a first 
integral and an energy surface, the order is reducible to 2N- 2. 
Some illustrative examples follow. 
a.) Reduction of order by ignoration of a coordinate or by the integral of energy 
in a conservative system. As will be seen, the work here is actually trivial, but 
it will serve to explain the method. Suppose that one of the coordinates, say 
xN+l• is absent from Q(x, y). In view of what has been said above about the 
symmetry of the notation, this may mean either that ·(i) the system has an ignorable coordinate (Sect. 46), or (ii) that the system is conservative [tis absent from 
H(q, t, p)]. Both cases are covered by the following argument. 
Our assumption is oQ ------0 
OXN+l - ' 
and consequently we have the first integral 
F(x, y) = YNH = const. 
The partial differential equations (92.13) has the very simple form 
and a suitable solution is 
oG , 
~=YN+l• u~N+l 
G(x, y') = x,y;. 
By (92.15) this gives the identical transformation 
y, = y;, x,= ' x,, 
(92.22) 
(92.23) 
(92.24) 
(92.25) 
(92.26) 
and the problem of reduction in order to 2N is solved by merely picking out 
from the canonical equations the 2N equations 
(92.27) 
To complete the reduction to order 2N- 2 on the energy surface, we write 
the equation of that surface in the form 
Q(x, y) = YN + w(x1 , 00 • xN, y1 , 00 • YN-l• YNH) = 0. (92.28) 
Then (92.27) give, as in (92.9), 
dx1 ow 
-dxN = oy;' 
dyl ow 
(92.29) 
dxN ox1'_' 
Let us translate this into (q, t, p, H) notation, using (92.10). We start with 
an energy function Q(q, p, -H), 
t being absent by hypothesis. We have the first integral 
H=E, 
and, as in (92.27), the equations of motion 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/l. 
(92.30) 
(92.31) 
(92-32) 
11 
162 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 92. 
We now take an energy surface .Q=O, and write its equation in the new form 
(92.33) 
the constant E having been substituted for H. Then, as in (92.29), we have the 
equations of motion 
dql ow 
-dq;.- = op----; • 
dpl ow 
dqN = -aq;, 
(92.34) 
Here w contains the independent variable qN. Thus, in a conservative system, 
we reduce1 the order of the canonical equations to 2 N- 2 by means of the integral 
of energy H =E. 
{J) Reduction of order by means of an integral linear in the momenta. Suppose 
that a system has a first integral 
Y1 + Y2 + y3 = const. (92.35) 
It is convenient to modify the above plan, and use a generating function G (x 1 , y) 
and the CT oG 1 eG 
x, = ~' y, = ----,---,-. (92.36) uy, ux, 
We seek G to satisfy 1 aG 
Y1 + Y2 + Ya = Y1 = w · 1 
A suitable solution is 
G = x~ (YI + Y2 + Ya) + x~ Y2 + · · · + x~+l YN+I; 
it satisfies 
fJ2G det~-~-=f=O, ux,uy5 
(92.37) 
(92.38) 
(92.39) 
so that (92.36) gives aCT (x, y)->-(X1 , y'). Since y~ is a constant of the motion, 
.Q'(x1 , y1 ) lacks x~. and the new equations of motion read 
dx~ f)[J' dxN+I f)[J' l (JW= ey; • =-,-, dw OYN+I 
dy; B!J' dYN+I f)[J' (92.40) 
dw- - ox~' dw - OXN+I' 
a system of order 2N. 
Integrals of the above type occur in the 3-body problem (Sect. 53); in that 
case we have three integrals of linear momentum, 
Yt + Y" + Y1 = Y~ , l 
Y2 + Ys + Ys = Y2, 
Ya + Y& + Ye = Y~, 
(92.41) 
the right hand sides being constants of the motion. The system has 9 degrees 
of freedom (N =9). By taking the generating function 
G(x', y) = x~(Yt + Y4 + Y7) + x~(Y2 + Ys+ Ys) + } 
+ x~(Ya+ Y&+ Ye) + X~Y4+ ··· + X~oYto• (92.42) 
------
1 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], p. 313, for a different description of this reduction. 
Sect. 93. Circulation theorem. 163 
we eliminate x~, x;, x~ from the transformed Q, in which y~, y~, y~ appear as 
constants. The canonical equations of the form (92.1) are thereby reduced 
from order 20 to 20-6=14. But if we work in the space QP (Sect. 96), using 
an energy function H(q, p) instead of Q(x, y), the reduction in order is from 
18 to 121 . 
y) Reduction of order by means of an integral of angular momentum. Suppose that 
F(x, y) = X1Y2- X2Y1 = y~, (92.43) 
a constant of the motion. According to (92.13) we are to solve the partial differential equation 
(92.44) 
A suitable solution is 
G (x, y') = y~ [y; (xi+ x~) +arc tan ::] + x3 y~ + · · · + xN+I Y~+I; (92.45) 
it satisfies the determinantal condition (92.14), and gives the CT 
(92.46) 
The variable x~ is absent from the new energy function. The generating function 
(92.45) is reached by the use of polar coordinates, x1 = rcos&, x2 = rsin{}. 
VI. The space of states (QTP). 
93. Circulation theorem. In the (2N + 1)-dimensional space of states Q T P 
the coordinates 2 of the representative point are qe, t, Pe. The Hamiltonian H 
is not a coordirtate, but a function of position in Q T P: 
H = H(q, t, p). (93 .1) 
The canonical equations of motion are 
. oH 
qQ = ope' (93.2) 
1 For the reduction of the order of the equations of motion in the 3-body problem from 
18 to 6, see WHITTAKER [28], pp. 340-351. 
2 We shall work in the small, and avoid reference to overlapping coordinate systems 
(cf. Sect. 63). For notation, see Sect. 62. 
11* 
164 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 94-
Written in the form 
dq1 dqN dp1 dPN 
oH =···=-oH =~=···= oH 
dt 
1 ' (93-3) 
op1 opN oq1 - oqN 
in order to put all the coordinates on a parity, these equations exhibit the natural congruence of trajectories in Q T P, one curve passing through each point. 
We note that (93-2) imply 
(93.4) 
To discuss circulation in Q T P independently of the discussion in Sect. 90 
for Q T PH, we define the circulation in any circuit C to be 
"(C) = ~ (Pe {Jqe- H {Jt). (93-5) 
c 
Giving to C any infinitesimal displacement d (not necessarily along the natural 
congruence), and integrating the varied expression by parts, we get 
d" (C)= <j} (dPe {Jq0 - dqe {Jpe- dH {Jt + dt {JH) ) 
c 
= <j} [{Jqu(dPe + :~ dt) + lJPe(- dq0 + :~ dt) + (93-6) 
c 
+ {Jt (- dH + ~~ dt)]. 
If, now, the displacement d is along the natural congruence, it follows from 
(93-3) and (93.4) that 
d"(C) = o. (93-7) 
On the other hand, if d"(C) =0 for arbitrary C and for a displacement d taken 
along some congruence, then that congruence must satisfy (93-3) and (93.4), 
and is in consequence the natural congruence. In fact the circulation condition 
(93-7) is equivalent to the canonical equations (93-2). 
94. Transformation of coordinates in Q T P. The Pfaffian form. Let us make 
a general transformation 
(q, t, p)-+ (x), (94.1) 
where (x) stands for a set of 2N + 1 variables. We -shall denote these variables 
by xA, giving capital suffixes the range 1, 2, ... 2N + 1, with the summation 
convention in the case of a repeated suffix. We are 1n fact assigning completely 
arbitrary coordinates to the points of Q T P. 
Under the transformation (94.1) we get 
(94.2) 
where the X's are functions of the x's. The circulation in a circuit C is now 
"(C)=~XA{JxA, 
c 
and if we give C any displacement d, we get 
d" (C) = ~ (dXA {JxA - dx, {JX.~); 
c 
(94.3) 
(94.4) 
Sect. 94. Transformation of coordinates in QT P. 
writing 8XAf8x8 =XA,B• we change this to 
d~(C) = tXA,B (dX8 (')xA- dxA bx8 ) ) 
= <} (XA,B- X8 ,A) dx8 bxA. c 
165 
(94.5) 
If dxA is along the natural congruence, then d~(C) =0 for arbitrary C (cf. 
Sect. 93); therefore the trajectories must satisfy the equations 
(94.6) 
This is the form taken by the canonical equations when we use a general coordinate 
system in QT P. 
This important result can be seen otherwise; dxA are the components of a 
contravariant vector with respect to arbitrary transformations (we might have 
written dxA to emphasise that fact), and XA,B-XB,A are the components of 
a skew-symmetric tensor; therefore (94.6) are vector equations, true for all 
choices of coordinates if true for one1 . But if the coordinates xA are chosen as 
follows: 
X1 = ql, · · · XN = qN' ) 
XN+l = pl, ··· X2N= PN, 
x2N+l = t, 
then, referring to the identity (94.2), we see that 
. Xl=PI····XN=PN,) 
xN+l=o, ... x2N=o, 
x2N+l = - H(q, t, p). 
(94.7) 
(94.8) 
On substituting these expressions in (94.6), we obtain the canonical equations 
(93.2), and therefore (94.6) represent the trajectories in all coordinate systems, 
since they represent them in the coordinate system (94.7). 
In (94.6) we have 2N + 1 homogeneous equations in the 2N + 1 differentials; 
we know (quite apart from the preceding argument) that they are consistent 
because the matrix of the coefficients, being skew-symmetric and of odd order, 
is of rank 2N at most (in other words, its determinant vanishes). We have then 
a new approach to dynamics in Q T P, based on a Pfaffian form 2 
XA oxA' (94.9) 
1 It is interesting to compare (94.6) with (73.5), in which the total dimensionality is even, 
but the determinant of the coefficients vanishes by (73.1). 2 For the theory of Pfaffian forms, see G. DARBoux: Le Probleme de PFAFF (Paris: 
Gauthier-Villars 1882); E. CARTAN: Leyons sur les invariants integraux (Paris: Hermann 
1922); E. GouRSAT: Leyons sur le probleme de PFAFF (Paris: Hermann 1922); and for a very 
general treatment, J. A. ScHOUTEN and W. v. D. KuLK: PFAFF's Problem and its Generalizations (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1949). See also WHITTAKER [28], p. 307 et seq. CARTAN's 
exterior multiplication and exterior differentiation (op. cit., pp. 52, 65) provide a highly 
condensed notation, but, as with all condensed notations, one needs much practice to use 
it with confidence; for the application of this notation to dynamics, see CARTAN (op. cit.); 
P. DEDECKER: Sur le theoreme de !a circulation de V. BJERKNES et !a theorie des invariants 
integraux, Inst. Roy. Meteorol. Belg. Misc. no. 36, 1951; F. GALLISOT: Les formes exterieures 
en mecanique (Chartres: Durand 1954.- These, Paris, published separately and in Tome 4, 
Ann. Inst. Fourier). See also E. CART AN: Les systemes differentiels exterieurs et leurs applications geometriques (Paris: Hermann 194 5); TH. DE DaNDER: Theorie des invariants integraux 
(Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1927); W. SLEBoDzn:rsKI: Formes exterieures et leurs applications 
(Warszawa: Panstwowe Wydawnicto Naukowe 1954). 
166 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 95. 
the X's being functions of the x's. Any such Pfaffian defines trajectories by the 
Eq. (94.6), and this is an invariant method, independent of any particular choice 
of the coordinates xA. 
If we have two Pfaffian forms, 
(94.10) 
where G is a function of position in Q T P, then (94.6) gives the same trajectories 
for the two forms. In other words, the trajectories are not changed if an exact 
ditferential is added to the Pfatfian form. 
Let (q, t, p) be canonical coordinates in Q T P, so that the trajectories satisfy 
the equations aH (94.11) 
The associated Pfaffian form is 
Pe bqe- H(q, t, p) bt. (94.12) 
Apply a transformation (q, t, P)--+(q', t', p'). In the transformed Pfaffian there 
will in general appear terms in bq~, bp~, bt', and the coefficient of bq~ will not in 
general be p~. But suppose the transformation to be such that we can split off 
an exact -differential from the transformed Pfaffian, leaving a Pfaffian in which 
there is no differential bp~ and in which the coefficient of bq~ is p~ The coefficient of M will be a function of (q', t', p'); write -H'(q', t', p') for it. Then we have 
Pebqe- H(q, t, p) bt = p~ bq~- H'(q', t', p') bt' + bG, (94.13) 
bG being an exact differential, and the canonical Eqs. (94.11) transform into1 
(94.14) 
95. Canonical transformations in QTP. If we want to make coordinate transformations in Q T P which conserve the canonical form of the equations of motion, the best plan is to work with the Pfaffian form (94.12), canonical transformations as treated in Sect. 87 being suited to a space with an even number 
of dimensions. Phase space Q P is of even dimensionality, and we shall return 
to canonical coordinate transformations in discussing Q P in Part. E VII. However, before leaving Q T P, we shall now see how the motion of the system provides us with a canonical transformation between two surfaces on each of which t 
is constant; these surfaces are suited to canonical transformations, being of even 
dimensionality. 
Let us go back to the two-point characteristic function S (x*, x) of Sect. 72, 
which we now write 5 = S(q*, t*, q, t). (95.1) 
Consider two surfaces I*, I in Q T P, with t = const on each of them. The 
natural congruence establishes a correspondence E* ~ E between the points of 
these two surfaces, E* and E being the points where the surfaces are cut by 
a single trajectory, as shown in Fig. 44. This must not be confused with 
Fig. 35 of Sect. 75, which shows, in the (N +i)-dimensional space Q T, a set 
of trajectories forming a coherent system (an rxP set of curves); on the other 
hand, Fig. 44 shows representative curves taken from the congruence of all 
trajectories (an oo2N set of curves). 
1 For the connection of this with canonical transformations in the space QP, see Sect. 97. 
Sect. 96. Basic theory in QP for conservative systems. 167 
By (72.12) we have 
bS = Pebqe- Hbt- P: bq: + H*bt*, (95.2) 
for arbitrary variations of E* and E. The transformation E*~E is therefore 
given by 
(95-3) 
t* and t being assigned the constant values which they have on 1:* and l; respectively. The transformation of H is given by 
H=- 85 H*=~ (95.4) at ' at• · 
We recognize (95.3) as a 
canonical transformation 
(q*, p*) ~ (q, p)' (95.5) 
the quantities t* and t entering 
as parameters in the generating 
function S. If we hold t* fixed 
and lett vary, we have a continuous set of canonical transformations which transform 
the initial isochronous surface 
(t = t*) into all subsequent isochronous surfaces. 
Fig. 44. Canonical transformation E*----+E produced by the natural 
congruence of trajectories in Q T P. 
We might also use the momentum-energy characteristic function W(y*, y) of 
Sect. 79 to generate a canonical transformation. Expressing it as 
W = W(p*, H*, p, H), (95.6) 
the transformation is [d. (79.14)] 
(95.7) 
The surfaces which are thus canonically transformed into one another are surfaces on which H is constant. This transformation breaks down if 8Hj8t = 0, 
for then H is constant on each ray or trajectory, and so they cannot transform 
one surface H = const into another. 
VII. Phase space ( QP ). 
96. Basic theory in QP for conservative systems. In Parts E II to VI a number 
of different representative spaces have been used in order to throw light on the 
mathematical structure of Hamiltonian dynamics; in spite of the variety of 
representations, they are all concerned with a single type of theory based on an 
assumed energy equation !J(x, y) =0 or on a Hamiltonian H(q, t, p). Of these 
spaces, Q T, Q T PH and Q T P are best suited for discussion of theory of the 
most general type; PH is of somewhat special interest in connection with encounters; Q is useful for conservative Hamiltonian systems [for which H = H(q, p)] 
and also for non-Hamiltonian dynamics. 
168 ] . L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 96. 
We now come to the last of the representative spaces, the 2N-dimensional phase 
space Q P, in which the coordinates1 of a point are qe, Pe. Of all the representative spaces, Q P is probably the most familiar to physicists, on account of its use 
in statistical mechanics 2• 
In studying Hamiltonian dynamics in Q P, the time t is to be regarded as a 
parameter and the Hamiltonian as a given function H(q, t, p) of the variables 
(q, p) and of this parameter. The canonical equations 
• oH . aH ( 6 ) 
qe=ap;• Pe=- 8qe' 9.1 
describe the motion of the representative point in Q P. The general case (oHfot =!= 0) 
and the conservative case ( 8Hf 8 t = 0) must be distinguished from one another. 
In the conservative case we have 
H = H(q, p), (96.2) 
and we see Q P filled with a natural congruence with equations 
dq1 dqN dpl dpN 
oHfoP1 = · · · = oHfop; = - oHfoq1 = · · · = - oHfoq;i' (96.3) 
each curve of the congruence (i.e. each trajectory) lying on a (2N -1)-dimensional 
surface with equation 
H(q, p) = E, (96.4) 
where Eisa constant. The corresponding picture for the case where H = H(q, t, p) 
is much more complicated, because the direction of a trajectory at a point of 
Q P depends on the value oft, so that there are oo1 possible directions at a point 
in Q P, depending on the value oft. 
For the rest of the present Section, only conservative systems are considered, 
with H as in (96.2). 
Comparing (86.6) with (96.1), we see that conservative dynamics in Q P with 
Hamiltonian H(q, p) is mathematically identical with dynamics in Q T PH with 
energy function Q(x, y). The only difference is one of notation. 
This isomorphism is interesting because it links together two extremes of 
Hamiltonian dynamics. On the one hand, dynamics in Q T PH is as general as 
anything we could wish at present, both the timet and the Hamiltonian H being 
put on mathematical parity with (q, p), so that the theory is well suited for 
relativistic use. On the other hand, conservative dynamics in Q P covers those 
problems with which we are most familiar in Newtonian dynamics, arising out 
of the motion of systems of particles and rigid bodies. 
But although dynamics in Q T PH and conservative dynamics in Q P are 
mathematically isomorphic, their physical interpretations are completely different, and it is advisable to translate briefly the theory developed for Q T PH 
into the form appropriate to conservative dynamics in Q P. 
1 In the large, overlapping coordinate systems may be required (cf. Sect. 63). with canonical transformations in the overlaps. 2 Cf. ]. W. GIBBS: Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics (Yale: Scribner 1902); 
The Collected Works of]. WILLARD GIBBS, Vol. II (New York-London-Toronto: Longmans 
Green 1928). GIBBS (op. cit. pp. 6, 1 0) introduced the geometrical idea of phase space, possessing 
an invariant extension-in-phase given by J dp1 .•. dPN dq1 ..• dqN. For a full and illuminating 
discussion of the work of GIBBS, see the articles by A. HAAS and P. S. EPSTEIN in A Commentary on the Scientific Writings of ]. WILLARD GIBBS, Vol. II (New Haven: Yale University 
Press 1936), edited by A. HAAS. The space QP is also called ,u-space (,u-Raum) or r-space 
(T-Raum) according to the way in which it is used in statistical theory; cf. A. MuNSTER: 
Statistische Thermodynamik, pp. 27, 99 (Berlin-Gottingen-Heidelberg: Springer 1956). 
Sect. 96. Basic theory in QP for conservative systems. 169 
The following table shows the correspondences 1 : 
Coordinates of point 
Energy function 
Canonical equations 
Special parameter on 
trajectories 
Circulation 
Invariant bilinear form 
PoiSSON brackets 
LAGRANGE brackets 
Space of states and energy Q T PH 
of 2 N + 2 dimensions. 
dx, 
dw 
o.Q 
oy, 
x,, y, 
.Q(x, y) 
dy, 
' dw 
w 
<} y, <5x, 0 
<51x,<5zYr- <5zx,dly, 
().Q 
ox. 
ou OV OV ou [u v] = ---- ---- ' ox, oy, ax, oy, 
{u v}- ox,_ oy, - ox, oy, 
' - ou OV ov ou 
Phase space Q P of 2 N dimensions. 
qQ, PQ 
Hamiltonian H(q, p) 
dqQ - oH dpp - oH 
lit- opp ' dt- oqp 
<} PQ <5qp 0 
<51qe<5zPp- <5zqp<51Pp 
ou OV OV ou [u, v] = ----------
oqp app oqp opp 
{u v} = oqe ~_fl_- _ojg_ opP 
' au ov ov ou 
If we give a circuit C in QP a displacement (dq, dp) along the natural congruence, then, as in (90.17), the change in circulation is 
dx (C)= d <} PQ bqe = - <} dt bH. (96.5) 
c c 
Therefore the circulation is unchanged by the displacement if either 
(i) the circuit C moves with the system, so that dt = const, or 
(ii) the circuit C is drawn on an isoenergetic surface H = const. 
The canonical transformations (88.20) are translated as follows: 
P = acl (q, q') p' = _ oGl (q, q') . 
e oqe ' e oq~ ' (96.6a) 
oG2 (p,p') ,_ oG2 (p,p'). 
qe = opP qe- - ap~ ' (96.6b) 
P = oG3 (q, p') , _ oG3 (q, p') . 
e oqe ' qe- op~ ' (96.6c) 
ac4 (p, q') p' = ac4 (p, q') 
qe = ape ' e oqQ • (96.6d) 
Here the generating functions are arbitrary except for conditions of non-singularity 
such as 
det 02 G1 (q, ?') =j= 0. 
oqe oqa (96.7) 
The different generating functions yielding the same transformation are connected 
as in (88.19). 
In QTPH, Q transformed as an invariant and the special parameter w on 
the trajectories was unchanged under CT. Therefore, in QP, H transforms as 
an invariant and t is unchanged. The canonical equations (96.1) transform into 
., oH' 
________ qe = ap~ ' H'(q', P') = H(q, p). (96.8) 
1 For notation, see Sect. 62. 
170 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 97· 
To transform the trajectories in QP into parallel straight lines we translate 
Sect. 91 as follows 1 . We find G(q, p') to satisfy the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation 
H(q, ~~)=P~. det a::~p~ =f=O. (96.9) 
Then the CT 
P = oG(q,p') , BG(q,p') 
qe = ap~ 
gives the Hamiltonian e Bqe ' 
H'(q',p') =H(q,p) =P~. 
and the trajectories integrate into 
q~ = a1 , ... q~_ 1 = aN-I• 
p~ = b1, 0 0 0 P~-1 = bN-1• 
where the a's, the b's and E are constants. 
q~ = t, } 
PN=E, 
(96.10) 
(96.11) 
(96.12) 
For a conservative system we can always depress the order of the canonical 
equations by 2 by means of the integral of energy 
H(q,p) =E, (96.13) 
which is an immediate consequence of (96.1). This reduction was carried out in 
Sect. 92, and it suffices to note the technique here. We solve (96.13) for one of 
the momenta, PN say, obtaining 
(96.14) 
then the reduced equations, of order 2N- 2, are as in (92. 34), with w replaced by f. 
Given a first integral F(q, p) (i.e. a constant of the motion), we reduce by 2 
the order of the equations of motion as in Sect. 92, by solving 
F(q, -~~) = p~, det a::~p:; =t= o (96.15) 
for G(q, p') and using the CT (96.10). Since p~ is constant in the motion, the 
new Hamiltonian H' (q', p') lacks q~, and the new equations of motion read 
., BH' ., oH' ) 
q1 = ap~ · · · qN- 1 = BPN-1 ' 
oH' oH' p~ =- <>q'l ... p~-1 =---. u oqf,;_1 
(96.16) 
Having done this, we can effect a further reduction of 2 in the order by means 
of the integral of energy (96.13). 
Note that solving the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation is equivalent to determining 
the motion. The solution of (96.15) may be a much simpler matter, for F(q, p) 
may be a simple function like P1 +P2+P3 [cf. (92.35)]. 
97. Non-conservative systems. Canonical transformations in QP. POISSON 
brackets and LAGRANGE brackets 2• We now turn to the general non-conservative 
system with Hamiltonian H(q, t, p) involving the time, so that 
BH at =t= 0. (97.1) 
1 This formal argument is valid only in the small; cf. Sects. 63, 100. 2 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], Chap. 11. 
Sect. 97. Non-conservative systems. Canonical transformations in QP. 171 
Since the energy function in QTPH was Q(x, y) and not Q(x, y, w), we cannot 
apply the QT PH-theory by a simple reduction in dimensionality, as we did for 
a conservative system in Sect. 96. It is true that QTPH-theory is valid in all 
generality, but it is set in a space in which t is a coordinate, and we have now 
to demote t to the position of a mere parameter. 
Consider a function G(q, q', t) and the transformation (q, p)-+ (q', p') given by 
p' = _ ac (q, q'_._!l_ 
e aq~ . (97.2) 
Then 
(97.3) 
or 
Pe bqe- H(q, t, p) bt = p~ bq~- K(q', t, p') bt + bG, (97.4) 
where 
K(q',t,p') =H(q,t,p) + aG(~l·t). (97.5) 
Now G is a function of position in the space QTP [since we can solve (97.2) for 
q~ in terms of (q, t, p)], and we can apply the Pfaffian argument as in (94.13); 
this tells us that the canonical equations 
(97.6) 
transform into ., aK qe=-ap~' (97.7) 
the Hamiltonian being changed as in (97.5). Thus (97.2) is a canonical transformation (CT) in Q P, the generating function G containing t as a parameter. 
This treatment in QP is less general than the treatment given in Sect. 94 
for QT P, because we have not in the present instance transformed the time. 
For time-preserving CT in QTPH, see (88.26). 
Let u and v be any two functions of the 2N + 1 quantities (q, p, t), i.e. functions of position in QP and of the parameter t; their POISSON bracket is defined as 
au av av au [u v] = ------~- (97.8) ' aqe ape aqe ape · 
As the representative point moves along a trajectory, the rate of change of 
any function F(q, p, t) is 
(97.9) 
In particular we have, as an alternative expression of the canonical equations, 
(97.10) 
We shall now show that if u (q, p, t) and v (q, p, t) are two constants of the motion, 
then so also is their PmssoN bracket [ u, v J. 
We are given 
_1!_11,_ = ~ + [u H] = 0 t!!' = ~ + [v HJ = 0. dt at ' • dt at ' (97.11) 
172 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 98. 
Now by (97.9) we have 
d a Iii [u, v] =at [u, v] + [[u, v], HJ, (97.12) 
and in this equation we can change the last term by the PorssoN-JACOBI identity 
[cf. (89-3)] [[u,v],w] + [[v,wJ,u] + [[w,u],v] =0, 
so that, remembering the skew-symmetry of PoiSSON brackets, 
:t [u,v]= :t [u,v]-[[v,H],u]+[[u,H],v]. 
Applying (97.11}. we get 
:t [ u, v] = :t [ u, v] + [ ~~ ' u] - [ ~; ' v] = 0' 
which establishes the result. 
Consider now an oo2 family of trajectories with equations 
q" = qe(u, v, t), Pe = Pe(u, v, t), 
(97.13) 
(97.14) 
(97.15) 
where u and v are constant along each trajectory. Then the LAGRANGE bracket 
(97.16) 
is a function of u, v and t: we shall prove by direct calculation that this LAGRANGE 
bracket is a constant of the motion. We have 
oqe _ . _ oH ope _ · _ iJH 
7ft- qe- ape • at- Pe- - aq(! • 
and these are functions of u, v and t. Then 
!:_(oq(! ape)=~(aq~ oPe)=~(aH)f!?_e __ oqe~(oH) 1 dt au ov ot au ov au ape ov au ov oqe 
_ o2H oqa oPe+ o2H oPa oPe_ - apeoqa au-av- ap(!oPa ali"Tv . 
oqe o2H oqa oqe o2H opa 
-au oqe oqa Tv- au oq(! oPa av 
_ o2H opa oPe_ o2H oqP oqa - app opa au Tv oq'l oqa au Tv. 
Interchanging u and v and subtracting, we get 
d lii{u,v}=O, 
establishing the result. 
(97.17) 
(97.18} 
(97.19) 
98. Non-conservative systems. Absolute integral invariants in Q P. LIOUVILLE's 
theorem. We continue to consider a general system for which H = H (q, t, p). 
Let capital suffixes A, A1 , ••• take the values 1, 2, ... 2M where M :;;,N, N being, 
as always, the number of degrees of freedom of the system. Consider an oo2M 
family of trajectories with equations 
qf! = qe(u, t), P(! = Pe(u, t), (98.1} 
where u stands for a set of 2M quantities uA which are constant along each 
trajectory. 
Sect. 98. Non-conservative systems. Absolute integral invariants in QP. 173 
For any fixed value oft, the Eqs. (98.1) define a surface of 2M dimensions 
immersed in QP. Let D be a domain in this surface, limited by bounds on the 
ranges of uA. Introduce the following 2M x 2M determinant, a function of the 
u's and oft: 
oqe. oqe. oqe. 
ou1- au; ... ou2M 
oqe. oqe. oqe. au; au; ... OU2M 
oqeM oqeM oqeM 
au; ou2 ... au;~ 
opa, opa, opa, au; ou2-- ... ou2M 
(98.2) 
Here e1 , ••• (IM, 0'1 , ... aM are any numbers in the range 1, 2, ... N. Then the 
integral J LIM(el, ... eM, 0'1, ... aM) dul ... du2M 
D 
(98.3) 
is invariant in the sense that it has the same value no matter what parameters 1 
uA are used in D. Define rpM by 
rpM= LIM(e1 .... eM, e1 .... eM), 
with the summation convention operating; and define 
IM = ~! J rpMdui ... du2M· 
D 
Its value is independent of the choice of parameters uA in D. 
(98.4) 
(98.5) 
Using the permutation symbol BA, ... A,M, which is skew-symmetric in all its 
suffixes and equal to unity when they read 1, 2, ... 2M, we may write out the 
determinant (98.2) explicitly. But we need only rpM as in (98.4); it reads 
(98.6) 
There is summation here for each e on the range 1, ... N and for each A on the 
range 1, ... 2M. In terms of LAGRANGE brackets, we have 
rpM= (-!)M BA 1 ···A 2M {UA1 , UAM+l} {UA 2, UAM+>} ... {UAM' UA 2M}. (98.7) 
Each LAGRANGE bracket is independent oft by (97.19). Therefore rpM is independent of t, and we conclude that the integrals I M, as given in (98.5) for 
M = 1, 2, .. . N, are absolute 2 integral invariants. 
The case M = N is of particular interest. The absolute integral invariant 
IN=;, J rpNdui ... du2N 
D 
(98.8) 
is now an integral extended over a 2N-dimensional portion D of the 2N-dimensional phase space QP. This domain changes with t, the representative points 
1 Provided that their orientation is not changed; cf. H. D. BLOCK: Quart. Appl. Math. 12, 
201-203 {1954). 2 Called absolute {not relative) because D need not be a closed domain (e.g. a circuit). 
174 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 98. 
being carried along according to the canonical equations (Fig. 45). For any chosen 
value of t, we may use (q, p) as coordinates in D, so that 
U1 = ql, ·· · uN = qN, uN+I = Pt• · · · U2N = PN· (98.9) 
Then (98.2) and (98.4) give 
LlN(!?t• · · · !?N • 0'1, ···aN) = ee•···eN ea, ... aN'} 
tPN= N!, (98.10) 
and the integral invariant IN becomes 
IN= I dql··· dqNdPt··· dPN= I dqdp, (98.11) 
D D 
to use an abridged notation. Calling this integral the volume 1 of D, we have 
LIOUVILLE's theorem: the volume of any portion of QP is conserved when thereFig. 4 5. Conservation of volume in Q P 
(LIOUVILLE'S theorem). 
presentative points whick compose it move in accordance with the canonical equations. 
This result is so fundamental .in statistical 
mechanics that we shall look at it in two other 
ways. 
First, LIOUVILLE's theorem, as proved by him 2, 
is aCtually more general, neither the evenness of 
dimensionality of the space nor the canonical form 
of the equations of motion being required. Consider 
the equations 
where the right hand sides satisfy 
oXA =0 
OXA ' 
(98.12) 
(98.13) 
the suffix A ranging 1, 2, ... M, with the summation convention. Instead of 
following LIOUVILLE, we may use a hydrodynamical argument. The Eqs. (98.12) 
define a velocity-field vA =XA in an M-space in which xA are taken as rectangular 
Cartesian coordinates, and, just as in ordinary hydrodynamics 
~+~+~ ox oy oz 
is the expansion (rate of increase of volume per unit volume), so in this M-space 
ovAfoxA is the expansion, volume being defined as I dx1 • •. dxM. Then, by virtue 
of (98.13), volume is conserved. The details of proof can be filled in by expressing 
the rate of increase of a volume, moving according to (98.12), as an integral over 
the (M -1)-space bounding it, and applying GREEN's theorem.·· It is evident 
that (98.13) is true in particular if M is even and (98.12) are canonical. 
The second alternative approach is through canonical transformations (CT). 
The essential point here is that the jACOBIAN of aCT is unity [cf: (88.29)], this 
being true even if aCT (q, p)-+ (q', p') contains t as a parameter. Two conclusions 
follow from this. First, without referring to motion at all, we recognize the 
integral IN of (98.11) as a suitable definition of volume, since volume so defined has the same value for all coordinates (q, p) in QP obtained from one set 
1 GrBBS called it extension-in-phase; cf. footnote to Sect. 96. 2 J. LIOUVILLE: J. de Math. 3, 342 ( 1838); the famous theorem is a secondary result in 
his paper. 
Sect. 99. Action-angle variables. 175 
of coordinates by CT1 . Secondly, volume is conserved in the motion because 
motion in accordance with the canonical equations consists of infinitesimal CT 
[cf. (90.4)]. 
In statistical mechanics 2 we consider a vast number n of identical Hamiltonian 
systems, differing only in their initial conditions. The superposition of these 
systems in the space QP gives an ensemble, a "fine dust" of representative 
points with a probability density l(q, p, t) such that n I dq dp is the number of 
representative points in the volume element dq dp at timet. As the element dqdp 
moves with the dust according to the canonical equations, its volume is conserved 
and also the number of representative points in it. Hence d 1/d t = 0, or, equivalently, Of 
8t + [!, H] = 0. (98.14) 
This is the fundamental partial differential equation to be satisfied by the density 1. 
determining I for any t when I is given for t = 0. 
99. Action-angle variables 3. Action-angle variables were introduced by C. DELAUNAY for the discussion of astronomical perturbations 4 • Later, they were found 
to be admirably suited to the older form of quantum mechanics, for the BOHRSoMMERFELD quantization consisted in making each action variable an integral 
multiple of PLANCK's constant h. 
As treated below, the theory of action-angle variables depends on the separation of variables in the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation. Even though the space QP 
should have Euclidean topology, one or more of the separating variables may be 
cyclic (e.g. an azimuthal angle) 5• However, the presence of cyclic coordinates 
is not an essential feature of the theory and their inclusion makes the discussion 
a little more complicated. Therefore it will be assumed that they are absent, 
essential modifications due to their presence being noted where necessary. 
Let the Hamiltonian 6 H(q, p) be such that the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation 
is of the separable type (Sect. 78). By this we mean that, in the 2N-dimensional 
space of the variables (q, P'), the partial differential equation 
has a solution of the form 
H (q, ~~) = p~ 
G(q, p') = Gl(ql, P') + G2(q2, p') + ... + GN(qN, P')' 
p' standing for the N quantities p~, and the determinantal condition 
CJ2G 
det oqe opa =f= 0' 
being satisfied; in other words (99.2) is a complete integral. 
(99.1) 
(99.2) 
(99.3) 
1 There is no definition of volume invariant under arbitrary transformations of (q, p). 2 SeeR. H. FowLER: Statistical Mechanics (Cambridge: University Press 1936); A. I. 
KHINCHIN: Mathematical Foundations of Statistical Mechanics (New York: Dover Publications, Inc. 1949); A. MuNSTER: Statistische Thermodynamik (Berlin: Springer 19 56); also 
the article by E. A. GuGGENHEIM in Vol. III, part 2 of this Encyclopedia. 
3 For various treatments of action-angle variables, with illustrative examples and reference to quantum conditions and adiabatic in variance, see M. BoRN: The Mechanics of 
the Atom, Chap. 2 (London: Bell1927); CoRBEN and STEHLE [3], pp. 239-264; FuEs [6]; 
GOLDSTEIN [7], pp. 288-307; LANCZOS [15], pp. 243-254; A. SoMMERFELD: Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines, Vol. 1, pp. 615-623 (translated from Sth. German Edn. by H. L. 
BROSE, London: Methuen 1934; 3rd Edn.). 4 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], pp. 426, 431. 5 Note that the word cyclic is used in a topological sense, and is not to be confused with 
ignorable (cf. Sect. 63). 
6 The system is assumed to be conservative, i.e. oHjot = 0. 
176 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 99. 
A canonical transformation (CT) is defined by 
P _ OG(q.~ 1_ oG(q,p1) 
Q - 0qQ I qQ- op~ (99.4) 
We observe the effect of separation here; when written more explicitly, the first 
set of these equations read 
P _ oG1(q1, p'J p _ ac2(q2,p1 ) 
1 - oql , . 2 - oq2 , (99.5) 
each equation contains only one p and the corresponding q, but of course all the 
quantities p~ are, in general, involved in each equation. 
The new Hamiltonian is 
H1 (q 1 ,p1 )=H(q,p)=H(q, ~~)=p;_,, (99.6) 
and the new equations of motion are 
• I oH1 • 1 aH, ( ) 
qe = ap~ , Pe =- oq~ . 99.7 
Therefore all the quantities (q1 , p1) are constant 
along each trajectory, except q;_,; for it we have 
q;_,= 1, so that q;_,=t+const. We can write 
p;_, = E, (99.8) 
E being the constant value of H on the traFig. 46. Circuit I',(p') or .r,(j) in the plane: jectory. By the CT (99.4) we have transformed 
the canonical variables q, p,. the trajectories into parallel straight lines, as 
in Sect. 96. 
Consider a representative plane Il1 in which q1 , P1 are taken as rectangular 
Cartesian coordinates (Fig. 46). If the N quantities p~ are held fixed, the first 
equation in (99.5) defines a curve in Il1 ; denote this curve by F1(p1). Similarly 
the other equations in (99.5) define curves ~(P'), ... JN(P') in representative 
planes Il2 , ... liN. 
We now assume that these curves are all closed1 ; in each of the representative 
planes we have ooN circuits FQ(p1 ), a set of circuits, one in each plane, being determined by the values of the N quantities p~. 
Define quantities fe by the formulae 
h = <} pldql, ... lN= <} PNdqN, (99.9) 
I't(P') I'N(P') 
these being in fact the "areas" contained within 2 the several circuits determined 
by the values p~. Assuming that 
ofe det -, =F 0, (99.10) BPa 
we have a two-way functional relationship {]) ~ (p1), and we may express p~ as 
function of the ]'s: p~ = p~(]). (99.11) 
Substituting these functions in (99.1) and (99.2), we have a solution of 
( oG*) 1 H q,aq = PN(]) (99.12) 
1 In the case of a cyclic coordinate, the circuit may appear like T 1 in Fig. 31, p. 104. 
2 Or under, in the case considered in preceding footnote. 
Sect. 100. The periodic property of angle variables. 177 
in the 2N-dimensional space of the variables (q, ]), this solution being of the 
form (still separated) 
(99.13) 
This function we now use as generating function for aCT (q, p)-+ (w, ]), expressed 
by the formulae P = _CJ__G* (q_J)_ oG* (q, J) 
e oqe , we=-~· (99.14) 
The quantities fe are called action variables and the quantities we angle variables. 
When action-angle variables are used, the Hamiltonian involves the action 
variables only; we write it H*(J). The canonical equations of motion read 
• oH* • oH* 
le=- owe =0, we=aie-, (99.15) 
so that the ]'s are constant along each trajectory and the w's are given by 
w11 = v11 t + <511 , 
where vf! and <511 are constants, the former being 
oH* 
"'a= ofe . 
The constant value of H along the trajectory is 
H=E=H*(J), 
the constant E being the total energy in ordinary dynamical systems. 
(99.16) 
(99.17) 
(99.18) 
100. The periodic property of angle variables. Let F(J) be any circuit in the 
space QP such that all the action variables fe are constant along it. A position 
of the representative point Bin QP determines positions of representative points 
B11 in the planes lie (Fig. 46), and when B is carried once round F(J), these points 
Be are carried round the respective circuits !;(]), perhaps several times over. 
Symbolically, we may write 
F(J) = nil I; (]) ' (100.1) 
where the coefficients ne are integers (positive, negative or zero). In (100.1), and 
below, the summation convention operates as usual over the range 1, ... N. 
On carrying B round F, the generating function G*(q,]) is increased by 
L1rG* = <} ~~: dqe = <}Pedqe. (100.2) 
T(J) 1 (J) 
To examine this final expression, we write out the first set of the transformation 
Eqs. (99.14): 
(100.3) 
The first of these equations sets up a connection between p1 and q1 which is the 
same for the point Bon F(J) and the corresponding point B1 on I;_(]); therefore, 
by the definition of h. in (99-9), we have 
c}P1 dq1 = n1 c}p1 dq1 = n1 k (100.4) 
ru> r.<J> 
Thus (100.2) gives (100.5) 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 12 
178 ] . L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 100. 
We see that, on the basis of assumptions explicit and implicit, the functions 
Gt (q1 , ]) , ... Gt;(qN, ]) are necessarily multiple valued functions of their q-arguments. 
Now vary the action variables ~ infinitesimally, the circuit F(J) varying 
in consequence. The n's in (100.5), being integers, cannot change under this 
infinitesimal variation, and we get 
15LlrG* = nu15k 
On the other hand, from (100.2) we have 
MrG* = 15 ~ Pu dqu = ~ (15Pu dqQ- d 15e dpe). 
T(J) T(J) 
(100.6) 
(100.7) 
This last expression is the bilinear form invariant under CT (cf. Sect. 96), and 
therefore 
15LirG* = ~ (15 ~ dwe- 15we d fe). (100.8) 
T(J) 
But the ]'s are constants on both the varied and unvaried circuits F; therefore 
d~=O and 15~=const, and we have 
15LlrG* = 15~Llrwp, (100.9) 
where Llrwe is the increment in wP on passing once round F(J). Comparing this 
last equation with ( 1 00.6), we may state the result: On taking the representative 
point B once round any circuit F(]) in QP for which the action variables ~ all 
have fixed values, the increment in the angle variable we is 
(100.10) 
where nP is the number of times the point Be goes round the circuit J;(]) in the 
plane ne. 
In particular, if we hold all the quantities (q, ]) fixed except q1 , then the 
point B1 moves on the curve Jl (]) in Il1 , and the points B2 , •.• BN remain fixed. 
This causes the representative point Bin QP to move on some curve, and when 
B1 has completed a circuit of Jl(]), B has completed some circuit Jl*(J) for 
which the numbers nu of (100.1) are 
n1 = 1, n2 = · · · = nN = 0. 
Substituting in (100.10) and writing Ft for F, we have 
Lfr,•W1=1, Lfr,•W2 =0, ... Lfr,•WN=O. 
Hence more generally, with the notation interpreted as above, 
Now let the second set of equations in (99.14) be solved for qP: 
qe = qu (w, ]) . 
(100.11) 
(100.12) 
(100.13) 
(100.14) 
If we fix all the quantities (w,]) except w1 , we leave one degree of freedom in 
the representative point B in QP, the P's being given to within that one degree 
of freedom by (100.3). Then B moves on some curve in QP, and the "projected" 
points Be move on the curves J;(J). Let w1 be increased continuously from 0 
to 1, the other w's being held fixed as aforesaid. From inspection of (100.12) 
we conclude that, when this operation has been completed, the point B1 will 
Sect. 100. The periodic property of angle variables. 179 
have gone once round !;,{]) and the points B2 , 00. BN will have been restored 
to their original positions without having gone round their respective circuits. 
The same argument can be applied to increases of unity in each of the angle 
variables individually, and we conclude that the functions (100.14) are periodic 
in each of the w's with period unity1• 
We can therefore expand these functions in FouRIER series of the form 
q =~A 0 e2ni(n,w,+ .. ·+nNU'N) (100.15) {] L...J e, n11 ••• n_.y , 
(n) 
the summation running over all integer values of the n's (positive, negative and 
zero), and the A's being complex functions of the action variables J, such that 
a reversal in the signs of all then's turns an A into its complex conjugate. Then, 
by (99.16), the motion of the system is given by 
q = ~ B 0 e2ni(n,v,+ ... + "N"N)t (100.16) Q ~ Q,nlr···"..v ' 
(n) 
the B's being functions of the ]'s. In this sense, the quantities v~ are "frequencies". 
If we know the function H*(]), they can be calculated at once from (99.17) by 
differentiating this function. 
It has been assumed that the curves in the planes II~ defined by the Eqs. {100.3) 
(for fixed values of the ]'s) are closed, these closed curves being in fact the 
circuits f'e (]). This assumption does not at all imply that the motion of the 
system is periodic: we see from (100.16) that it is periodic if, and only if, the 
ratios of the frequencies v~ are rational numbers. 
A system is called degenerate if the frequencies satisfy a relation of the form 
(100.17) 
where s1 , •.. sN are integers or zero, with at least two non-zero. Degeneracy 
occurs when the Hamiltonian H*(]) involves the action variables in certain 
ways which the following example illustrates. Suppose the Hamiltonian is of 
the form 
H*(]) = /(K, h_, lr,, 00 ·lv), } 
K = m1.h + m2h +rna fa, (100.18) 
where the m's are integers. Then 
BH* of '~~I= 8]1 = ml BK' (100.19) 
and we have a double degeneracy: 
(100.20) 
As indicated in Sect. 63, the exposition of general dynamical theory in this 
article is, from the standpoint of modern pure mathematics, on a rather low 
level of precision. As far as theory in the small is concerned, it would not be 
hard to make those additions which would make it precise, but action-angle 
variables take us out of the small into the large through the introduction of the 
circuits f'e{]). This raises topological questions of considerable complexity, not 
touched on here. 
1 A cyclic coordinate will not be periodic. It is increased by its cyclic constant, and (100.15) 
and (100.16) are modified by the addition of other terms; cf. FuEs [6], p. 140, GOLDSTEIN [7], 
p. 295. . 
12* 
180 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 101. 
VIII. Small oscillations. 
101. Reduction of energies to normal form. Normal modes and frequencies. 
Degeneracy. Consider a dynamical system with N generalized coordinates 1 q~ 
and Lagrangian 
L=T- V, T 1 ()"o"a = 2aea q q-q ' V = V(q), 
the system moving in accordance with LAGRANGE's equations 
a oT oT 
dt oqe oqe 
av 
oqe 0 
This is the ordinary dynamical system (ODS) of Sect. 66. 
(101.1) 
( 1 01.2) 
We geometrize in configuration space. Q. The representative point describes 
a trajectory in accordance with (101.2), the trajectory being determined by an 
initial point qe and an initial velocity qe. If, at a certain point in Q we have 
~=0 oqe ' (101.3) 
then no motion results if the velocity vanishes; these N equations define equilibrium configurations, and we may expect in general to find a discrete set of 
such points in Q, since the number of equations is equal to the number of coordinates. We shall now discuss small oscillations about equilibrium. 
By a change of coordinates, we can make the equilibrium point the origin 0 
(qe=o there), and also make V=O at] 0, since potential energy is always 
undetermined to within an additive constant. Expanding aea(q) and V in power 
series about 0, the principal parts of T and V become 
T -.! ·e·a V lb e,.,a - 2 ae a q q ' = 2 e a q '1 • ( 1 01.4) 
Here the coefficients are constants, and ae a= aae, bQ a= bae. The equations of 
motion (101.2) now read aeaqa+beaqa=O. (101.5) 
For the sake of mathematical clarity, it is wise to forget that we are dealing 
with an approximation, and regard the Eqs. (101.4) and (101.5) as defining our 
problem, with qe finite; the homogeneity of the system permits this. 
The straightforward practical method of solving (101.5) is to substitute 
(101.6) 
where oce are constant complex amplitude factors and w a circular frequency. 
On eliminating the oc's from (101.5), we get the secular equation 
(101.7) 
from which to determine the values of w. Any positive root w2 gives a real w; 
this is a normal circular frequency, and the corresponding normal mode of oscillation 
is given by the real part of ( 1 01.6), the amplitude factors being solutions of 
( 101.8) 
The ratios of the oc's are real, but they have an arbitrary common complex factor. 
The above method is difficult to follow if the secular equation ( 101. 7) has 
repeated roots, and a much deeper insight into the mathematical structure of 
1 To agree with tensor notation, we use superscripts here. See Sect. 62 for summation 
convention. 
Sect. 101. Reduction of energies to normal form. 181 
the problem presented by (101.4) and (101.5) is gained by starting afresh, using 
the geometry of the space Q. We assume (as is the case for all natural systems) 
that the kinetic energy is positive-definite. Then the quadratic form 
A= aeaqeqa (101.9) 
is also positive-definite, and there exists a linear homogeneous transformation 
(q) ~ (q') which makes 1 
If we denote finite increments by L1, the formula 
D2 = ae a L1 qe L1 go = L1 q? + ... + L1 q;J 
defines a finite Euclidean distance D between 
any two points of Q. (This is the integrated 
form of the kinematical line element of Sect. 84.) 
The kinetic energy is 
T=taeaqeqa=t(q~ +q~ + .. · +q;J). (101.12) 
We may now treat Q as a Euclidean Nspace, qe being oblique Cartesian coordinates 
and q~ rectangular Cartesian coordinates. We 
are concerned with the geometrical form of the 
equipotential surfaces, which have the equations 
B = beoqeqa= b~aq~q~= const, (101.13) 
( 101.11) 
Fig. 47. Reduction to normal coordinates by 
b~a being the new coefficients after application maxima (the case where N ~ 3). 
of the transformation. 
To investigate the principal axes of the equipotential surfaces, and to discover whether they are ellipsoidal or hyperboloidal in character, we proceed as 
follows. It is convenient to have before us at the same time expressions in both 
the coordinate systems (q) and (q') ; the former will be written on the left, and 
the latter on the right. On the sphere SN-l with equation 
(101.14) 
B is a function of position, and it attains a maximum value (say 21) at two or 
more points of SN_1 ; let U(Ile (or U~(Il) be the coordinates of such a point (Fig. 47). 
NOW intersect the sphere s_, -1 by the plane orthogonal to this last vector, 
with equation 
a u(I)e qa = 0 or U'(I) q' = 0 
ea e e ' (101.15) 
thus obtaining a sphere of N- 2 dimensions (say SN_2). On SN_ 2 B attains a 
maximum (say ).2) at two or more points; let u<2le (or u~< >) be the coordinates 
of such a point. We have the orthogonality condition 
a U(l)e U<2>a = 0 or U'e(I) U'e<2> = 0. 
ea ' (101.16) 
Next we cut SN_ 2 by a plane orthogonal to U<2>e, obtaining a sphere SN_3 , and 
proceed as before. Carrying on this process, we arrive at a circle 51 and finally 
at a pair of points 50 • 
I It is convenient to denote the new coordinates by q~ (not q' e); for transformations conserving the form (101.10), there is no distinction between contravariant and covariant quantities. 
182 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 101. 
In this way we get a set of N mutually orthogonal unit vectors, U(a) e or 
U~(a), with numbers A.a associated with them, these being the maxima of B under 
the conditions stated above. Then, by an orthogonal transformation, 
(101.17) 
we change to new rectangular Cartesian coordinates q~ with axes in the directions of the aforesaid orthogonal vectors, and it is easy to show, by reason of the 
maximal properties, that the form B lacks all product terms when expressed 
in the coordinates q~. 
Dropping the double primes on the final coordinates, we may state this 
result: Given two quadratic forms, A and B, with A positive-definite, there exists 
a linear homogeneous transformation which turns A into a sum of squares and B 
into a form lacking product terms; equivalently, the kinetic and potential energies 
(101.4) can be transformed into 
T = t (q~ + q~ + · · · + q~), } 
V= i(A.lq~ + A.2q~ + ... + A.Nq~). (101.18) 
These final coordinates are normal coordinates. There is no implication in the 
above argument that the A.'s are positive or that they are distinct; they are of 
course real, since the argument did not go outside the real domain 1. 
Once the energies have been put into the normal form (101.18), the discussion 
of the motion is extremely simple, for the equations of motion (101.2) become 
(101.19) 
in which the variables are separated. Depending on the sign of the A. contained 
in it, the solution of any one of these equations is as follows: 
q = a cos VI t + b sin VI t if A. > o , ) 
q = a t + b if A. = 0, 
q = a Cos V- A. t + b Sin V- A. t if A. < 0, 
(101.20) 
where a and b are constants. 
The equilibrium is stable under any one of the following equivalent conditions: 
(i) All the A.'s are positive. 
(ii) be a qe qa is a positive-definite form. 
(iii) The potential energy Vis a true minimum at the equilibrium configuration. 
If any one of the A.'s is zero or negative, the equilibrium is unstable. In the case 
of stability, the equipotential surfaces are ellipsoidal; in the case of instability, 
they are ellipsoidal (with V a maximum at the centre) or hyperboloidal or cylindrical. 
Suppose the equilibrium stable, so that each normal coordinate varies sinusoidally as in the first of ( 1 01.20). Then a normal mode of oscillation is one in 
which only one normal coordinate oscillates, the others being zero, and the 
normal frequencies ve and normal circular frequencies we are 
(101.21) 
1 The transformation of the energies to normal form, as in (101.18), whether by means of 
maximal properties or otherwise, is basic in all thorough treatments of the theory of small 
oscillations. Cf. CORBEN and STEHLE [3], Chap. 8 (where there are a number of examples 
of systems with few and with many degrees of freedom); GoLDSTEIN [7], Chap. 10; WHITTAKER [28], Chap. 7. 
Sect. 102 The effect of constraints. 183 
If two or more of these frequencies coincide, the system is degenerate 1 . In a 
normal mode, the representative point in Q performs a harmonic oscillation 
on a straight line. These straight lines are the principal axes of the equipotential 
surfaces ( 101.13) when these surfaces are referred to the coordinate system (q'). 
In a non-degenerate system, these lines are fixed in direction; for a degenerate 
system, they are partially indeterminate, lying in a plane of two or more 
dimensions (according to the degree of degeneracy). and the normal mode can be 
performed on any one of these lines, the normal coordinates in that case being 
partially indeterminate. In a completely degenerate system, the direction of a 
normal mode of oscillation is completely arbitrary; in this case the equipotential 
surfaces are spheres in the coordinate system (q'). 
Under arbitrary initial conditions, the system performs a motion which is 
a superposition of all the normal modes; in general, the orbit in Q is a very complicated curve, and the motion is periodic only if the ratios of the normal frequencies are rational. 
The roots of the equation 
det (aea A- bea) = 0 (101.22) 
are invariant under linear transformations of the q's. For normal coordinates, 
as in ( 1 0 1.18), this equation becomes 
(101.23) 
Therefore A.1 , A.2 , ••• )..N are the roots of ( 1 01.22) ; they are in fact the eigenvalues 
of the matrix bea relative to the matrix aea· If A is any one of these eigenvalues, 
the equations 
(101.24) 
define the corresponding eigenvectors for any system of coordinates. From the 
invariance of these equations it is easy to see, by using normal coordinates, that 
these eigenvectors point in the directions of the normal modes of oscillation. 
Since (101.22) is the same as (101.7). and (101.24) is the same as (101.8) (except 
for trivial change in notation), we recognize the mathematical significance of 
the simple substitution (101.6), which remains, when all is said, the most practical 
technique for dealing with vibration problems. A degeneracy is indicated by 
a multiple root of the secular equation (101.7). 
102. The effect of constraints. To a system with kinetic and potential energies 
as in (101.4), let a constraint (102.1) 
be applied, the A's being constants. 
If we regard the energies in ( 1 01.4) as approximations, valid for small values 
of the velocities and coordinates, then (102.1) may be thought of as arising 
from any constraint which is independent of the time; it may even be nonholonomic, there being no distinction in a linear approximation between holonomic 
and non-holonomic. 
As in (46.15). the equations of motion of the constrained system are 
( 102.2) 
where{} is an undetermined multiplier. To investigate the motion, we substitute 
(102.3) 
1 This word is overworked; cf. Sect. 100 for a different meaning. 
184 J. L. S"XNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 102. 
in (102.1) and (102.2); on eliminating the ex's and{} we get the following determinantal equation for the circular frequency w: 
I 
agaw2- bQa AC?I = 0. (102.4) 
Aa 0 
That is the practical plan. But to find the relationship between the frequencies 
of the unconstrained and the constrained systems, it is best to use normal coordinates of the unconstrained system, as in {101.18). Then, with A. written 
for w2, (102.4) becomes 
LI(A.) = o, (102.5) 
where 
A. - A.l 0 AI 
0 A.-A.2··· A2 
Ll (A.) =- (102.6) 
0 0 ···A.-A.N AN 
AI A2 AN 0 
the numbers A0 being now the coefficients in the equation of constraint (102.1) 
when expressed in the normal coordinates. On expansion, we have 
Ll (A.) = AHA. - A2) (A. - Aa) . ·. (A.- AN) + ) 
+ A: (A.- A.I) (A. - Aa) · · · (A.- A.N) + 
+ A: (A- AI) (A. - ).2) ... (A.- AN) + • 0 • 0 •• 0 0 •••• 0 
+ A~(A- AI) (A- A2) ... (A.- AN-I). 
(102.7) 
Here A1 , A.2 , ••• A.N are the squares of the circular frequencies of the unconstrained system. 
Suppose that the unconstrained system is non-degenerate; then, by a mere 
interchange of coordinates, we can arrange that 
At< A2< ... <AN. (102.8) 
Suppose, further, that none of the A's in (102.7) vanish. Then 
LI(A.N)>O, LI(AN-1)<0, LI(A.N-2)>0, ... , (102.9) 
and therefore Ll (A.) has N -1 real zeros, separating the numbers A.1, ... A.N. 
Under these circumstances (i.e. in what we may call the general case) the constrained frequencies separate the unconstrained frequencies. 
To allow for the possibility of one or more ofthe A's vanishing, this statement 
must be weakened to 
(102.10) 
where 'II indicates an unconstrained frequency and p' a constrained frequency. 
Degeneracy may be produced by constraint; in geometrical language, an ellipsoid 
possesses circular sections. 
The effect of applying a constraint to a degenerate system is best illustrated 
by an example. Take N = 5 and suppose 
At< A2 = Aa = A4 < A5 , (102.11) 
Sect. 103. Dissipative systems. Gyroscopic stability. 185 
so that there is a triple degeneracy in the unconstrained system. Then (102.7) 
becomes 
Ll (A) =A~ (A- A2) 3 (A- A5) + ) 
+ (A~ +A~ +A~) (A- A1) (A - A2) 2 (A- As) + +A~ (A- A1) (A- A2) 3 • 
(102.12) 
Supposing that none of the A's vanish, the graph of Ll (A) is now as in Fig. 48. 
We have 
and, near A= A2 , 
Ll (A) "'(A~+ A:+ A~) (A2 - A1) (A- A2) 2 (A2 - As)< 0. 
The constrained system has nor- L1f).J 
mal frequenciesv~<v~ =v~<v~, ~-A- -A..,-A..i -A.;· 
as indicated in Fig. 48 (pass from 
A' to v' by 4:n;2 v' 2 =A'). The 
triple degeneracy has been reduced by the constraint to a 
double degeneracy. 
(102.13) 
(102.14) 
A stable system remains A. 
stable under constraint, and an 
unstable system may be made Fig. 48. Effect of a constraint on a degenerate system. 
stable by constraint. 
For a system subject to one constraint, as discussed above, one of the coordinates may be eliminated, and N- 1 new normal coordinates introduced. 
This procedure enables us to study the effect of additional constraints. In the 
general case where there is no degeneracy and the constraints are not specially 
chosen, we get successive separations as indicated below: 
No constraint: 
One constraint: 
Two constraints: 
N- 2 constraints: viN-2) v~N-2) 
N- 1 constraints: y(N-1) 
1 
All these questions are, from a geometrical standpoint, questions about the 
lengths of the principal axes of plane sections of an ellipsoid in multidimensional 
Euclidean space; when so viewed, some of them can be answered very rapidly. 
103. Dissipative systems. Gyroscopic stability. Consider the following set 
of N linear differential equations with real constant coefficients: 
(10).1) 
Such equations occur in the study of dissipative systems and of gyroscopic 
systems, and also in the theory of electrical circuits. We regard them here as 
exact equations, although in practice they may only be linear approximations 
to more complicated exact equations. We are interested in the stability of the 
solutions of (10).1), the case where aea=aae• bea=bae and cea=O having been 
already treated in Sect. 101. 
186 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 103. 
Consider a system with kinetic and potential energies 
T = -laeaqeqa, V = tb2 aqeqa. (103.2) 
If, in addition to the generalized force - fJVjoq(!, a frictional (damping) force 
Qe =- Ceaqa (103.3) 
is applied, the equations of motion take the form (103.1). Hence we have 
:t (T + V) = Qeqe = - Ceaqeqa. (103.4) 
If we assume, as is natural, that the work done by the damping force is negative, 
then the quadratic form c(/aqgqa is positive-definite, and the quantity T + V 
decreases steadily. If the system is stable in the absence of damping, i.e. if V 
is positive-definite, then that stability is not destroyed by the damping. But 
if it is unstable without damping, we cannot tell whether the damping induces 
stability without recourse to a general argument as given below. 
Equations of the form ( 103.1) also occur for a system with Lagrangian of 
the form 
Here we find 
(103.5) 
(103.6) 
a skew-symmetric matrix. We meet Lagrangians of this form in rheonomic 
systems or as the result of the ignoration of coordinates, particularly in the 
case of gyroscopic systems; for that reason stability arising from the presence 
of the middle term in ( 103.1) is called gyroscopic stability1• 
We proceed to investigate the stability of the solutions of (103.1) by substituting 
(103.7) 
where the ex's and s are constants; on eliminating the former we obtain for s the 
determinantal equation 
Ll(s) = det (aeas 2 + Cuas + bea) = 0. (103.8) 
The criterion for stability is that every root of this equation should have a nonpositive real part 2• 
It is easy to establish the following result, already indicated in connection 
with (103.4): If aga=aa11 , bga=bag (but cea=l=ca9 in general), and if the three 
quadratic forms 
A= aeaquqa, B = beaq(!ga, C = Cgaqega (103.9) 
are all positive-definite, then the system is stable. To prove this, we note that 
the positive-definite character of B implies det bga=l=O, and therefore (103.8) has 
no zero root. Then, for any root s, we have 
(saga+ Cea + s-1 be a) oca = 0 (103.10) 
for some non-vanishing (complex) vector oca; multiplying by the complex conjugate a_g and adding to the equation so obtained its complex conjugate, we get 
(s + s) A'+ 2C' + (s-1 + S"-1) B' = o, ( 103.11) 
1 See Sect. 105 for the Hamiltonian treatment of oscillations about steady motion. 2 Overdamped systems, for which all the eigenvalues s are real and negative, have been 
discussed by R. J. DUFFIN, J. Rational Mech. Anal. 4, 221 (1955). 
Sect. 103. Dissipative systems. Gyroscopic stability. 187 
where 
This may be written 
(s+s)(A'+ :;)+2C'=O, {103.13) 
from which we obtain s +s < 0 (implying stability) since the positive-definite 
character of A, B, C implies that A', B', C' are all positive. 
Let us return to the determinantal equation (103.8), placing no restriction 
on the matrices ae"' be"' ce"' except 
detaea>O. (103-14) 
Then, on expanding the determinant, we have an algebraic equation of degree 
2N, the coefficient of s2N being positive. We seek necessary and sufficient conditions that all its roots should have negative real parts (a slightly stronger condition than the requirement of stability, 
for which a zero real part would suffice). 
In the argument which follows 1 , the 
evenness of the degree of the equation 
plays no part, and it is convenient to 
write the equation 
A 
~ C 
l(s)=a0 s"+a1 s"-1+ .. ·=0, a0>0. (103.15) Fig. 49. Interlocked polynomials. 
If, in the complex plane of s, we lead s along the imaginary axis from - co to 
+ oo, then the increase in arg I (s) is precisely n times the number of roots of 
I (s) = 0 with negative real parts. To use this fact, we write s = i y and 
l(s) = l(iy) = i"(P .. - iP .. _1) (1 03 .16) 
P,. = ao y" - a2 yn-2 + ... ' } 
pn-1 = a1 yn-1- aa y"-3 + ... . 
where 
(103.17) 
Thus, for son the imaginary axis, we have 
( 103 .18) 
and, if all the zeros off (s) have negative real parts, then arc tan (P .. _1(P,.) decreases 
by nn as y goes from - oo to + oo. This occurs if, and only if, the polynomials 
(Pn, P,._1) are interlocked in the following sense: 
(i) All the zeros of P,. (y) are real. 
(ii) All the zeros of P .. _1 (y) are real and separate those of P .. (y). 
(iii) The relation between P .. and P .. _1 is as shown in Fig. 49; P,._1 is positive 
at A and negative at B, these being successive zeros of P,., with P,. positive 
between them. This relation is equivalent to the condition that P,. and P .. _1 have 
the same sign in the limit y---* + oo. (In Fig. 49 arc tan P,._1fP .. decreases by n 
as we go from A to B.) 
Accordingly the question of the negative character of the real parts of the 
zeros of l(s) is equivalent to the question of the interlocking of (P,., P .. _1). To 
discuss this, we change the notation, writing a0=A,., a1 =A,._1 and 
Pn= A,.y"+ B .. y"-2+ ... , } 
pn-1 = An-1 yn-1 + Bn-1 yn- 3 + ... {103-19) 
1 E. J. RouTH; Stability of a Given State of Motion, Chap. 3 (London; Macmillan 1877); 
PERES [20], p. 265; RouTH [22] II, Chap. 6; WINKELMANN and GRAMMEL [29], p. 480. 
188 ] . L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 103. 
By the following formulae we define a sequence of polynomials P,._2 , P,._3 , ••• P0 
and a sequence of numbers A,._2 , A,._3 , ••• A0 (the coefficients of their highest 
powers): 
P,._2 = A,._zy"-2 + B,._zy"-4 + ... = A,.yP,._l -A,._lP,., 
Pn-3 = A,._3yn-a + B,._ay"-o + · · · = A,._l YPn-2- A,._zPn-1• 
Pz =A2yz + Bz 
P1 =A1y 
Po=Ao 
= A4YPs- AaP4, 
= AaYPz- AzP3, 
=AzyPl-AlPz. 
(103.20) 
As in (103.15), we take A,.= a0 > 0. Suppose {P,., P,._1) interlocked, which 
implies A,._1 >0. We shall prove that (P,._1 , P,._2) are interlocked. To do this, 
we see from the first of (103.20) that, at any zero of P,._1 , P,._2 and P,. have opposite signs. Therefore P,._2 has all its zeros real, and they separate those of P,._1 • 
In the limit y-+ + oo, P,._2 has the same sign as it had at the greatest zero of 
P,._1 ; that sign is the sign of -P,. at that zero, and is positive (cf. Fig. 49). 
Therefore A,._2 > 0; (P,._1 , P,._2) are interlocked. 
Proceeding step by step in this way, we see that all the pairs (P,._2 , P,._3), 
(P,._3 , P,._4), ••• {P1 , P0) are interlocked1, and (given A,.> 0) we conclude that 
the interlocking of (P,., P,._1) implies 
A,._1 > 0, A,._2 > 0, ... , A1 > 0, A0 > 0. (103.21) 
To prove the converse, we assume (103.21) with A,.> 0. For large y, the 
terms on the right in (103.20) are separately of higher order than the terms on 
the left; hence all the P's have the same sign in the limit y-+ + oo, and that sign 
is positive, the sign of A0 • Thus, by the last of (103.20), P2 is positive at infinity 
and negative at y = 0, where P1 = 0. Hence (P2 , P1) are interlocked, and, working 
up the table step by step, we conclude that {P,., P,._1) are interlocked. 
Thus (103.21) are necessary and sufficient conditions for the interlocking 
of (P,., P,._1), or, equivalently, for the negative character of the real parts of 
all the zeros of f(s). 
The quantities occurring in (103.21) may be expressed in determinantal form 
as follows, in terms of the coefficients in the formula (103.15) for f(s) 2: 
a1 a0 0 
A,._a= as a2 al , 
all a4 aa 
with the understanding that a,= 0 for r > n. 
0 
0 
(103.22) 
1 In the case of (.ll. P0 ). interlocking means merely that P1 has the sign of Po as y-+ + oo. 2 CH. HERMITE: Crelle's J. 52, 39 (1850). - A. HURWITz: Math. Ann. 46, 273 (1895); 
cf. R. GRAMMEL: Der Kreisel, Bd. 1, p. 259. Berlin: Springer 1950. 
Sect. 104. Forced oscillations. Resonance. Operational methods. 189 
104. Forced oscillations. Resonance. Operational methods. If, for a system 
moving in accordance with (103.1), all the roots of (103.8) have negative real 
parts, then, no matter what the initial conditions may be, the system ultimately 
tends to rest at the origin. In addition to the forces already represented in ( 103.1) 
we now supply a disturbing force Qe (t), regarded as a given function of t, and so 
modify the equations of motion to read 
(104.1) 
If the applied force is simple harmonic with circular frequency w, we write 
Qe = ~ eiwt. (104.2} 
After a long time, no matter what the initial conditions are, the system will tend 
to a forced oscillation given by (104-3) 
the complex amplitude factors a.e being found by substituting in ( 104.1) ; they 
must satisfy the equations 
(104.4) 
This is no eigenvalue problem; it is merely a question of solving a set of linear 
equations. But the eigenvalue problem represented by (103.8) is closely connected 
with the solution of (104.4), because the amplitude factors become large when 
the disturbing frequency is close to a natural frequency, or, more accurately, 
when iw is close to one of the roots of (103.8). Then we have resonance. 
Such problems are most compactly discussed by operational methods, and 
we shall show how to obtain the solution of (104.1) for a general disturbing force, 
not necessarily of the form (104.2}. For initial conditions we take 
qe = ne, qe = ve for t = 0. 
Let I denote the operation 1 of integrating with respect to t: 
t 
If(t)=Jf(r:}dr:. 0 
Apply the operator I to (104.1} and use (104.5); this gives 
aea (ir- v") + ce.,(q"- n") +be., I q" =I Qe. 
On repeating this operation, we get 
Aeaqa =Be+ I2 Qe, 
where 
Aea = aea + Ceai + beai2' } 
Be= ae.,na + aeai va + ce.,I na. 
(104.5) 
(104.6) 
(104.7) 
(104.8) 
(104.9) 
The Eq. (104.8} is equivalent to (104.1) and (104.5}; if it is satisfied, they are, 
as we may see on differentiating it. 
1 For details of the operational method, see H. JEFFREYS and B. S. JEFFREYs: Mathematical Physics, Chap. 7 (Cambridge: University Press 1956; 3rd. Edn.). They use Q for 
the integration operator, here changed to I to avoid confusion with the generalized force 
Much difficulty is caused in the operational method by the use of the HEAVISIDE operators p 
and p-1, which are not commutative, and, although they lend some formal simplicity to the 
work, they will not be used here. For operational methods based on the LAPLACE transform, 
see R. V. CHURCHILL: Modern Operational Mathematics in Engineering (New York and 
London: McGraw-Hill 1944); N. W. McLACHLAN: Modern Operational Calculus (London: 
Macmillan 1948); K. W. WAGNER: Operatorenrechnung (Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth 
1940) (lithoprinted Ann Arbor: Edwards 1944); I. N. SNEDDON: Fourier Transforms (New 
York: McGraw-Hill 1951). and this Encyclopedia, Vol. II, p. 251. 
190 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 104. 
The essence of the operational method consists in treating the operator I 
as if it were a number, the validity of results obtained in this way being checked 
afterwards. We treat Apa as a matrix of numbers and define DQa as the cofactor 
of the element Apa• so that 
(104.10) 
where D is the determinant 
D = det (apa +Cpa!+ bpal2). (104.11) 
Multiplying (104.8) by DP~' and then dividing across by D, we get 
q~'= ~ DP~'(BP+I QP). (104.12) 
The general rule of operational calculus is to expand any rational fraction in I 
as a power series in I. This ensures the commutativity of two such fractional 
operators. Now D is a polynomial of degree 2N in I; it is related to the polynomial L1 of ( 103 .8) by 
D (I) = J2N L1 (;). 
The fraction 1/D admits a unique power series expansion, 
~ = C0 + C1 l + C2 12 + ···, 
( 104.13) 
(104.14) 
and if this is substituted in (104.12) we get on the right hand side a mathematically meaningful expression, provided that the infinite process converges. If it 
does, then ( 1 04.12) is the solution of the differential equations ( 104.1) with the 
initial conditions (104.5). 
".13ut although 1/D is basically interpreted as an infinite series of operations, 
it not actually necessary to use an infinite series in order to calculate the solution 
(104.12). For, by (104.13), 
(104.15) 
where a 0 = det aP a and s1 , .•• s2N are the eigenvalues, satisfying ( 103 .8). We can 
then make resolutions into partial fractions as follows: 
DP~' Be = ___!1_ + __!!'{_____ + ... + K~N ) 
D 1 - s1 I 1 - s2 I 1 - s2 N I ' 
DPI' I L~~' Li" L PI' 
___ D ___ = -1---s1
-J + -1---s-2
-J + ... + 1- ~:NI ' 
(104.16) 
the numerators of the fractions on the left being polynomials of degree 2N -1 
in I; here the K's are constants depending on the initial data, and the L's are 
constants independent of the initial data, depending in fact only on the three 
matrices apa• bpa• cpa· The expressions (104.16) are now substituted in (104.12), 
and the following formulae 1 applied: 
-~1 1=erxt ) 1- a. I ' 
~I~f(t) = Jt f(-r) erx(t-r)d-r, 
1- rx.I 0 
( 104.17) 
1 These formulae are easily established; cf. JEFFREYS and JEFFREYS, p. 233 of op. cit. 
in preceding footnote. 
Sect. 105. Oscillations about steady motion. 191 
rx being any constant. The solution (104.12) takes the form 
q~-'=Ki_e +K~e'· + ... +K~Ne •Nt+ ) 
+ j[Li~-' es,(l-r) + L~~-' es,(t-r) + ... + L~~ e"•N(t-r)] QQ(r) dr. (104.18) 
0 
The above result is very general, except for the assumption made implicitly 
at ( 1 04.16), that the eigenvalues are distinct; in cases of degeneracy the partial 
fraction expansions must be modified by the inclusion of fractions with higher 
powers in the denominators. 
Let us now assume the disturbing force simple harmonic, as in ( 1 04.2). Further, 
let us assume that all the eigenvalues are distinct and have negative real parts. 
Then, omitting those terms which tend to zero as t--+ oo, we get from (104.18) 
the following expression for the forced oscillation due to the applied force ( 1 04.2): 
(104.19) 
Since the frequency w is here involved only where shown explicitly, the formula 
exhibits clearly the phenomenon of resonance 1 . 
105. Oscillations about steady motion or about a singular point in phase space 
( Q P). Transformation of H to normal form. Consider a dynamical system with 
N degrees of freedom and Hamiltonian H(q, p) from which some of the coordinates (q) are absent (ignorable coordinates). A steady motion is defined to be 
one in which the non-ignorable coordinates and the corresponding momenta are 
constant. 
Let there be M ignorable coordinates qA (A= 1, 2, ... M), the non-ignorable 
coordinates being written Q r(F = 1, 2, ... N- M), with a similar notation for 
the momenta. Then the Hamiltonian may be written 
H =H(Q, p. P), (105.1) 
and the equations of motion are 
• 8H 
qA = opA ' (105.2) 
· oH 
Qr= 8Pr' · oH 
Pr=- 8Qr' (105.3) 
The conditions for steady motion are 
Qr= 0, Pr= 0. (105.4) 
Combining these last conditions with (105.2), we get, for a steady motion, 
(105.5) 
where cxA are constants, so that the ignorable coordinates increase at constant 
rates and the corresponding momenta are constant. Combining (105.4) with 
(105.3), we get, for a steady motion, 
8H 
oQr = 0 • ( 105 .6) 
1 Cf. (33.10) for the harmonic oscillator. 
192 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 105. 
To obtain a steady motion, we have to satisfy these 2 (N- M) equations by 
assigning appropriate values to the 2N -M constants (Q, p, P). Thus we may 
in general expect to find ooM steady motions, M being the number of ignorable 
coordinates. 
If a system in steady motion is disturbed in such a way that the· constants 
P.A are not changed, we may investigate the oscillations about steady motion by 
using the equations of motion (105.3), linearised by assuming (Q, P) to have 
values adjacent to the constant values which they have in the undisturbed 
steady motion. 
Having thus formulated the problem of the oscillations about steady motion 
of a system possessing ignorable coordinates, we now present the same problem 
in a different way without reference to steady motions or ignorable coordinates. 
Given a Hamiltonian H(q, p), the canonical equations 
• aH • aH 
qe=ape' Pe=-aqe (105.7) 
define a direction of motion at every point in phase space ( Q P), except at those 
singular points where the 2N equations 
1!~ = o aH = o (105.8) oqe ' ape 
are satisfied. Since there are 2N quantities (q,p), we may expect in general to find 
a finite number of singular points in Q P. Each such point represents a complete 
history of the system, because the equations of motion (105.7) are satisfied 
by constant values of (q, p), provided these constant values satisfy (105.8). 
We shall now investigate trajectories in Q P adjacent to a singular point. 
On comparing (105.6) and (105.8), we recognize that such an investigation is 
at the same time an investigation of oscillations about a state of steady motion 
for a system with ignorable coordinates. The present approach has the advantage 
that we come at once to the heart of the matter. 
The discussion which follows is closely connected with the matters treated 
in Sect.103. But here we shall use Hamiltonian methods rather than Lagrangian. 
In the Lagrangian method we are restricted to transformations of the coordinates 
(q), the transformation of momenta (p) (if we bring in momenta at all) being a 
derived transformation; in the Hamiltonian method we can use canonical transformations (CT). 
Singular points in QP are invariant under CT. For (105.8) are equivalent to 
~H = 0 for an arbitrary variation of position in Q P, and this is invariant since 
His invariant under CT. 
Let qfJ = ae, p(J =be be a singular point. The generating function 
(105.9) 
gives the CT 
Pe= ;~ =P~+be, q~= :~~ =qe-ae, (105.10) 
so that the singular point becomes q; = 0, p; = 0. We shall now use these new 
canonical variables, dropping the primes. 
We assume H(q, p) expansible in a power series about the singular point. 
The constant term in the expansion is ineffective in (105.7), and we drop it. 
Then, in view of (105.8), we have, to the second order inclusive, 
H(q, P) = !Aeaqeqa + B~aqePa + !CeaPePa• (105.11) 
where the coefficients are constants. 
Sect. 105. Oscillations about steady motion. 193 
For compactness, we introduce the notation of Sect. 87, with a slight modification of dimensions, since we are now in Q P (of 2N dimensions) instead of 
in Q T PH (of 2N + 2 dimensions). We write 
(105.12) 
then (105.11) may be written 
2H=zHz, (105.13) 
where His a symmetric 2N X 2N matrix (H =H). As in (87.11), we write 
where 1 is now the unit N X N matrix, and note the properties 
r=-r, r-1 =-r, J'2 = - 1(2 N), det r = 1 . 
Then, as in (87.13), the equations of motion read 
z=rHz. 
(105.14) 
(105.15) 
(105.16) 
To find the nature of the motion, we seek to separate the variables in these 
equations, and this we do by applying a CT which reduces the matrix H to a 
simple (normal) form1. 
Consider the linear equations 
r Hz = A. z, or Hz = - A. r z, (105.17) 
and the associated determinantal equation 
det (H + A. r) = o, (105.18) 
which has 2N roots, real or complex, and not necessarily distinct. For any root 
A we have (since det r= 1) 
det [r(H + A.r)r] = o. (105.19) 
Transposing this matrix and using (105.15), we obtain 
det (H - A r) = o, (105.20) 
and comparison with (105.18) shows that, if A. is a root, then so also is -A.. We 
can write the whole set of roots as ± A.1 , ... ± A.N, and exhibit them in the form 
of a diagonal matrix 
L=(Lo 0 ) 0 -L0 ' (105.21) 
where L0 is the diagonal NxN matrix with elements ().1 , ... A.N). 
We shall assume that A1 , ••• AN are distinct 2• Then a set of solutions of 
(105.17) may be exhibited as a 2Nx2N matrix Z such that 
z-rrHZ=L. (105.22) 
1 Cf. WHITTAKER [28], pp. 427-429; C. LANczos, Ann. d. Phys. (5) 20, 653-688; 
C. L. SIEGEL, pp. 76-80 of op. cit. in Sect. 53. 
2 The present argument applies only to this non-degenerate case. The case of repeated 
roots is covered by the WEIERSTRASS contour-integration treatment of stability of motion, 
as given by WHITTAKER [28], pp. 197-202. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 13 
194 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 105. 
However (and this is important) this equation does not determine Z uniquely. 
If Z is any solution-matrix, then so is ZP, where Pis any diagonal matrix; and 
if Y and Z are two solution-matrices, then 
Z=YP, 
where P is some diagonal matrix. 
Let Z be any solution-matrix. Define Y by 
y = - (rz r)-1 = - r z-1 r. 
Then 
y-1 r H Y = r Z r · r H. r z-1 r = - r Z H r z-1 r. 
But, transposing (105.22), we have 
znrz-1 = -L, 
and so 
y-1 rHY= rLr=L. 
(105.23) 
(105.24) 
(105.25) 
(105.26) 
(105.27) 
Thus Y is also a solution-matrix, and so is connected with Z by (105.23), where 
P is some diagonal matrix. Hence 
P= y-1Z=- rzrz, rP=ZrZ, 
and, transposing, we get 
Pr=rP, 
from which it follows that P is of the form 
where P0 is a diagonal NxN matrix. 
(105.28) 
(105.29) 
(105.30) 
In the class of solution-matrices satisfying (105.22) we now seek one (say J) 
satisfying the symplectic condition [ cf. (87.16) J 
JrJ=r, (105.31) 
and this we do by taking any solution matrix Z, 
diagonal P by (105.28), defining D by 
forming the corresponding 
D= ( o p-1 0) 
0 1 I 
and writing 
J=ZD. 
It is easy to verify that 
nrD = rP-1 , 
and hence, using (105.28), 
J rJ = D Z r Z D =Dr P D =Dr D P = r, 
establishing ( 10 5 .J 1). 
With J defined by (105.33), we apply the CT 
z=Jz', 
and the Hamiltonian of (105.13) becomes 
2H = z' H'z', H'=JHJ. 
(105.32) 
(105.33) 
(105.34) 
(105.35) 
(105.36) 
(105.37) 
Sect. 105. Oscillations about steady motion. 195 
Since J is a solution-matrix, (105.26) gives 
JHrJ-1 = -L, JH= LJr, (105.38) 
and so 
(105.39) 
Thus by a CT we are able to transform a quadratic Hamiltonian to the normal form 
(105.40) 
where the A.'s are the roots of (105.18). The new coordinates (q', p') are in general 
complex. 
If we apply the further CT with generating function 
N "2 
G (q' p") = "" (q' p" - }._ ~ _ }. _ ;. ' 2) ' L..J I! II 2 ). 4 Q q(! ' 
(!=I (! 
(105.41) 
so that (without the summation convention) 
P' oG p" 1 A. , , _ oG _ , p;; 11 = oq~ = 11 -2 (!q(!, q(!- ap~'- qe- --;;-· (105.42) 
the Hamiltonian changes into an alternative normal form, 
H" = t (Pi' 2 + ... + p;; 2 _ ;.~ q~' 2 _ .•. _ ;.~ q;J 2) • (105.43) 
If we use the form (105.40), the equations of motion read 
. , a H' ~ , p", oH' 1 , 
qt= ap~ =,"J.qt····· ~=--aq~-=-AtPt····· (105.44) 
in which the variables are separated, and the motion is given by 
(105.45) 
the constant coefficients depending on the initial conditions. It is clear that 
the motion given by these equations is stable if, and only if, all the A's are pure 
imaginaries. 
It is easy to show that if H(q, p) is positive-definite, then all the roots of 
(105.18) are pure imaginaries, even in the degenerate case of repeated roots. 
Let A., z (with z=j=O) be any solution of (105.17). Let z be the complex conjugate 
of z, and zt the transpose of z (i.e. the row matrix). Then 
zt Hz=- A.zt r z. (105.46) 
From the positive-definite character of H, the left hand side is real and positive. 
Therefore A. =l= 0 (no zero roots) and 
zt rz=J=O. (105.47) 
Thisquantityiseasily seen to be a pure imaginary, and hence A. is a pure imaginary 
also. 
We have the following result: the motion of a system with homogeneous quadratic Hamiltonian His stable if His positive-definite1• 
1 We have proved it here only in the non-degenerate case of distinct eigenvalues; for the 
degenerate case, see preceding footnote 
13* 
196 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 106. 
106. Perturbations. Consider two dynamical systems, Sand 5', with canonical 
variables (q, p), (q', p') and Hamiltonians H(q, t, p), H'(q', t, p') respectively. 
They are completely independent.· Suppressing suffixes, we may write their 
equations of motion in the form 
5: oH 
q=e;;· P= • -iii; 8H l ., oH' ·, oH' (106.1) 
5': q =·ap', p =- oq'. 
Now think of S and S' as forming a single system S + S' with a Hamiltonian 
H(q, t, p) + H'(q', t, p') + K(q, q', t, p, P'), (106.2) 
K being an interaction Hamiltonian. (As a very simple example, we might take 
S and S' to be two free particles and K to be the potential due to their mutual 
gravitational attraction.) The equations of motion of S + S' are l 
. oH aK 
q-- -+ - s S': - ap ap, 
+ ., oH' oK 
q = iFf/+ op'-, 
p = _ oH 
oq _ !~ oq ' l ., oH' oK 
p = - ·aq'- - aq'. 
(106.3) 
The effect of K is to perturb the original motions ( 106.1) of S and S'. If the derivatives of K are small, the values of q, p, q ', p' at a given point of the space QT P 
of S + S' are nearly the same in the perturbed and unperturbed motions. But 
in a very long time significant changes in the motion may result; in that case 
we speak of secular changes. 
For the system formed by the sun and the planets, the Hamiltonian may be 
written in the form 
H = T(S) + 1: T(P) + 1: V(S P) + 1: V(P P'), (106.4) 
where T(S) is the kinetic energy of the sun, T(P) the kinetic energy of a planet, 
V(S P) the mutual potential energy of the sun and a planet, and V(P P') the 
mutual potential energy of two planets. To put this into perturbation form, we 
denote by 50 a fictitious sun fixed at the origin and define V' ( S P) by 
V'(S P) = V(S P)- V(S0 P). 
Then the Hamiltonian (106.4) may be written 
H =H(S) + L,H(P) + K, 
where 
H(S) = T(S), H(P) = T(P) + V(S0 P), 
(106.5) 
(1o6.6) 
(106.7) 
and K stands for the terms not otherwise accounted for. K is the perturbing 
Hamiltonian. 
The unperturbed motion is known, for H(S) corresponds to the free motion 
of a particle and H(P) to the KEPLER problem. The practical significance of 
( 1 06.6) lies in the fact that K is small; the actual motion of the solar system is 
a perturbation of a state of motion in which the sun is at rest, and the planets 
describe fixed elliptical orbits with the sun as focus, without mutual interaction. 
The basic idea behind perturbation theory is this: starting at t=t1 , the motion up to t = t2 of the complete system (including the perturbation) differs little 
from the unperturbed motion, provided we start the two motions from the same 
Sect. 106. Perturbations. 197 
point in Q T P-space and do not make the interval t2 - t1 long. Assuming the 
unperturbed motion known, the effect of the perturbation during such a finite 
interval can be found by approximate methods 1. 
Without making any approximations based in smallness of the perturbing 
Hamiltonian, the general perturbation problem may be stated as follows: Given 
the general solution of the canonical equations 
(106.8) 
of unperturbed motion, it is required to set up a technique to find the motion 
for the Hamiltonian 
H = H0(q, t. p) + H1(q, t, p), (106.9) 
H1 being the perturbing Hamiltonian. 
Let the solution of (106.8) be 
qe = qe (c, t), Pe = Pe (c, t), (106.10) 
where c stands for 2N arbitrary constants cA, capital suffixes having the 
range 1, ... 2N; these quantities are 
constant along each unperturbed trajectory. Solving (106.10), we have 
(106.11) 
these 2 N functions being determined 
by the form of the function H0(q,t,p). 
Let us view the situatl' on 1. n Q T p Fig. so. Perturbation viewed in Q T P. r, = unperturbed trajectories, r = perturbed trajectory. 
(Fig. SO) 2 • .E2N is the surface t = 0, 
B is any point, and To is the unperturbed trajectory through B, cutting .E2N 
at B*, say. Since cA are constant along T 0, we have at B* 
(106.12) 
Thus cA form a system of coordinates on .E2N; (c, t) form a system of coordinates 
in Q T P, but not a canonical system in general. The unperturbed trajectories 
To form a system of projection-lines by which a point B is projected into B*, 
the corresponding values of cA being given by (106.11). 
Consider now a perturbed trajectory T. At B its direction differs from the 
direction of T 0 , and as the representative point B traverses T, its projection B* 
moves on .E2N. For that reason, the method given here is called the method of 
variation of constants, since cA are constants for T0 but not for r. The perturbation 
problem is reduced to the study of the way in which cA vary with t as the representative point traverses T; if we knew this, then we would know T, its 
equations in the form 
CA = fA(t) (106.13) 
determining a curve in Q T Pin the coordinate system (c, t). 
1 For a detailed treatment of perturbations, with use of action-angle variables, see 
FRANK [5], pp. 127-156, and FUES [6]. 2 Remember that any set of canonical equations defines a congruence of curves in QTP, 
one curve through each point; cf. Sect. 93. 
198 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
On Fwe have, by (97.9), cA being the function (106.11), 
cA= o;:-+[cA,Ho+Hl], 
and on Fo. since cA is constant, 
O=ii/+ OCA [ J CA,Ho. 
Hence, by subtraction, we have on F 
cA = [cA, H1]. 
Sect. 107. 
(106.14) 
(106.15) 
( 106.16) 
By virtue of (106.10), or equivalently (106.11), the right hand side is a function 
of (c, t), and so we have here a set of 2N equations to determine the functions 
( 106.13) and hence the perturbed motion. 
The Eqs. (106.16) may be put in a different form. By (106.10) we can express H1 as a function of (c, t): 
H1(q, t, p) = K(c, t). ( 106.17) 
Then 
oK ocB (106.18) 
and 
[ H J ocA oHl oH1 ocA [ J oK CA, 1 = ~q Bp - ~q ap = CA,CB fie-· Q e Q Q B 
(106.19) 
Thus (106.16) may be written 
(106.20) 
So far everything is exact. But if the derivatives of H1 lire small, or equivalently the derivatives of K are small, then the right hand sides of (106.16) 
and (106.20) are small. The projected point B* moves slowly over l:2N, and we 
may approximate to its motion in the finite interval (tv t2) by substituting in 
these right hand sides the values of cA for t = t1 and integrating by quadratures1. 
F. Relativistic dynamics 2• 
I. Minkowskian space-time and the laws of dynamics.~ 
107. LoRENTZ transformations. Small Latin suffixes will now have the values 
1, 2, 3, 4, and small Greek suffixes the values 1, 2, 3, with summation understood 
in either case for a repeated suffix. 
Let x' be real coordinates of an event in the 4-dimensional manifold of spacetime; and let the separation ds between adjacent events be given by 
(107.1) 
1 For perturbation theory from the standpoints of Lagrangian equations and contact 
transformations, see CoRBEN and STEHLE [3], pp. 306-312. 2 The basic laws of Newtonian and relativistic dynamics were contrasted in Sects. 4 and s. 
Essential formulae are repeated here, but no more will be said about the peculiar difficulties 
surrounding relativistic systems. As general references for the special theory of relativity, 
the reader may consult 0. CosTA DE BEAUREGARD: La Theorie de la Relativite restreinte 
(Paris: Masson & Cie. 1949); P. G. BERGMANN: Introduction to the Theory of Relativity (New 
York: Prentice-Hall 1942), and this Encyclopedia, Vol. IV; A. EINSTEIN: The Meaning of 
Relativity (5th Ed.; Princeton: University Press 1955); HALPERN [9}; M. VON LAUE: 
Die Relativitatstheorie, Bd. 1 (5th. Ed.; Braunschweig: Vieweg 1952); C. MoLLER: The 
Theory of Relativity (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1952); A. PAPAPETROU: Spezielle Relativitatstheorie (Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften 19 55); J. L. SYNGE: Relativity: The Special Theory (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co 1956). 
Sect. 107. LORENTZ transformations. 199 
where the coefficients are functions of the coordinates, and e 1s an indicator 
chosen equal to + 1 or -1 so as to make ds real. 
In the special theory of relativity, with which alone we are concerned here, 
space-time is flat, which means that there exist real coordinates (x, y, z, t) such 
that 
ds 2 = e (dx 2 + dy2 + dz2 - c2 dt2), 
where c is a fundamental constant (the speed of light). 
(107.2) 
It is convenient to introduce Minkowskian coordinates, with "imaginary 
time ", defined by 
X1 = X, 
X3=z, x2 = y, } (107.3) 
x4 = i c t; 
then (107.2) may be written compactly as 
ds2 = e dx, dx,. ( 107.4) 
Minkowskian coordinates are 
used throughout this article; they 
have the great convenience that, 
for them, covariant components of 
vectors and tensors are the same 
as contravariant components, and 
we can write all vectors and tensors with subscripts, thus avoiding a notational complication. If 
the imaginary time x4 should ever 
be a source of confusion, we can 
at once pass from Minkowskian 
past 
Fig. 51. Null·cone. 'Past and future. Timelike, spacelike 
and null vectors. 
coordinates x, to real Cartesian coordinates x' by writing x(/ = xC!, x4 = ix4• We 
shall have occasion to pass to real coordinates in Sect. 111 in order to discuss 
a matter of sign. 
The group of LORENTZ transformations consists of those transformations 
(necessarily linear) which conserve the quadratic form dx, dx,. Any such transformation is of the form 
X~= A,s X5 + B,, 
where the coefficients satisfy 
(107.5) 
(107.6) 
Comparison with (9.6) shows that A is, formally, an orthogonal matrix, and this 
suggests that a LORENTZ transformation is a "rigid" displacement of spacetime into itself. This is true, in a sense, and very important for the understanding 
of the LORENTZ transformation, but the presence of imaginary elements in A 
(due to the imaginary time) makes the geometry of the LoRENTZ transformation 
essentially different from the geometry of orthogonal transformations of a 4-space 
with four real coordinates. 
The null-cone drawn from any event a, as vertex (Fig. 51) has the equation 
(x,- a,) (x,- a,) = 0. (107.7) 
Events exterior to the null-cone satisfy 
(x - a,) (x,- a,) > 0, ( 107.8) 
200 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 108. 
and those interior to it satisfy 
(x,- a,) (x,- a,)< 0. (107.9) 
The interior is divided into two parts, according as (x4 - a4)ji is positive or 
negative; these two parts are respectively the future and the past with respect 
to the event a,. 
A displacement dx, from a, into the future or into the past is timelike, and for 
it e = -1; a displacement on the null-cone is null, and one pointing outside the 
null-cone is spacelike (e = + 1). 
The null-cone remains invariant under a LORENTZ transformation, and so 
do its interior and exterior regions. But future and past may be jnterchanged. 
However, for our purposes we reject LORENTZ transformations which cause this 
interchange. 
By (107.6) the Jacobian J of a LoRENTZ transformation is]=± 1; the transformation is proper if J = + 1 and improper if J = -1. 
It is a basic postulate of relativity that all the laws of dynamics should be 
invariant under proper future-preserving LORENTZ transformations. This is 
equivalent to saying that the laws are capable of geometrical construction in 
terms of the geometry of Minkowskian space-time (cf. Sect. 5). 
It is further assumed that any displacement dx, along the world line of a 
material particle is timelike. This is equivalent to saying that no particle can 
travel as fast as light (see Sect. 108 below). 
The abstract concept of separation ds is given physical content by the assertion that, along the world line of a material particle, ds is a measure of proper 
time, i.e. the time recorded by a standard clock carried with the particle. 
An observer is said to be Galileian (or to use a Galileian frame of reference) 
if the separation ds between any two events is expressible as in (107.2) or (107.4) 
in terms of his coordinates. When two Galileian observers, 5 and 5', observe 
the same event, their observations are connected by a LORENTZ transformation. 
By cooperation between the two observers in the choice of space-axes, the LoRENTZ transformation connecting the two observations may be put into the simple 
form 
x' = y (x - v t), 
here 
y'= y, z'=z, 
Y = v v2 ' 1--c2 
t' = y (t - ~-;} (107.10) 
(107.11) 
and v is the relative velocity of 5 and 5'; more precisely, the velocity of 5' 
relative to 5 is (v, 0, 0), and the velocity of 5 relative to 5' is (-v, 0, 0). 
108. Kinematics in space-time. 4-momentum. a.) Velocity of a point. Consider 
a moving point (not necessarily a particle); the equations of its world line may 
be written x, = x, (x), ( 108.1) 
where X is a monotonic parameter. The 3-velocity of the point is 
(108.2) 
v = VvQ vQ, (108-3) 
is greater than, equal to, or less than c, according as the 4-vector dx,Jdx is spacelike, null, or timelike. 
Sect. 108. Kinematics in space-time. 4-momentum. 201 
For a material particle, this 4-vector is timelike, and we define the 4-velocity 
to be the timelike unit vector 
A= dx, r ds ' 
satisfying 
J.,J.,= -1. 
By (108.2) the relations between 3-velocity and 4-velocity are 
. Ao 
ve = zc--;:--, 4 
1 
y= -~---
v
/-v2 · 1--c2 
(108.4) 
(108.5) 
( 1 08.6) 
For a point moving faster than light, 4-velocity may be defined as in (108.4); 
we change -1 to + 1 in (108.5), and the relations with 3-velocity are as in 
(108.6) except that y is changed toy* where 
*- 1 
y - vv2 -. 
---1 
c2 
(108.7) 
For a photon we assume that dx,fdx is a null vector. Thus the speed of a 
photon is c. It has no definable 4-velocity; we cannot use ( 1 08.4) because d s = 0. 
fJ) Velocity of a wave. An equation 
(1 08.8) 
defines a 3-space in space-time. We may call it a 3-wave. It is the history of a 
2-wave, the instantaneous 2-wave being given by putting x4 = const in ( 1 08.8). 
The normal 3-velocity of the 2-wave is easily seen to be1 
(108.9) 
where F,. = oFjox,. Hence the speed u of wave propagation satisfies 
(108.10) 
Since F, 4 is pure imaginary, u is greater than, equal to, or less than c, according 
as the 4-vector F,, (which is the space-time normal to the 3-wave) is timelike, null, 
or spacelike. 
y) 4-acceleration. For a material particle the 4-acceleration is the 4-vector 
d)., d2 x, 
ds ds2-. (108.11) 
It is orthogonal (in the space-time sense) to the 4-velocity, because (108.5) gives 
, d)., = 0 
A, ds · (108.12) 
1 Cf. SY:-<GE, p. 419 of op. cit. in Sect. 107 of this article. 
202 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 108. 
The 3-acceleration, defined in the Newtonian way as 
{108.13) 
may be expressed as follows, since y ds = c dt, A4 = iy: 
{108.14) 
b) Composition of velocities. Let S and S' be two Galileian frames of reference with a LoRENTZ transformation as in ( 107.1 0) connecting them. Let a 
particle move with velocity (V, 0, 0) relative to S'. Then its velocity relative 
to S is (u, 0, 0) where 
(108.15) 
This law of composition of velocities may be expressed in terms of hyperbolic 
functions in the form 
(108.16) 
where u v v Tan1p =-, Tanrp =-, Tan t/J = ~. c c c (108.17) 
e) 4-momentum. With a particle we associate a number m, its proper mass, 
which is invariant under LoRENTZ transformation. The 4-momentum of a particle 
is defined as 
M,= mA,, (108.18) 
where A, is the 4-velocity. All four components have the dimensions of a mass, 
but we can change to the dimensions of momentum or energy by inserting c or 
c2 as a factor on the right hand side. 
We define, withy= (1- fc )-~. 
relative mass = my, 
relative momentum (3-momentum) = myvP' 
relative energy= E = myc2, 
proper energy= E0 = mc2, 
relative kinetic energy= T = mc2(y- 1). 
On expansion in powers of vfc, we have 
T=-mv 2 1 + -~+ ... 1 ( 3 v2 ) 
2 4 c2 ' 
the first term agreeing with the Newtonian value of kinetic energy. 
(108.19) 
The four components of M, are expressible in terms of relative momentum 
and relative energy as follows: 
M = m). = myvP ) p p c ' 
M , . iE 
4= m"-4= zmy = cz· 
{108.20) 
For a photon, the formula (108.18) fails, since m=O for a photon and the 
components of A, are infinite. We proceed as follows. 
Sect. 109. Equations of motion of a particle. 203 
The equation 2:n;v 
g; = g;0 cos -c- (np xP- ct), (108.21) 
where nP nP = 1, represents plane waves of frequency v advancing in the direction 
of the unit 3-vector n11 with speed c. Putting. 
fe=vne, /4 =iv, (108.22) 
we can write ( 108.21) in the form 
2:n; 
g; = g;0 cos-/, x,. c (108.23) 
In order that the phase factor may be invariant under LoRENTZ transformations, 
it is necessary and sufficient that /, should transform as a 4-vector. Thus the 
four quantities in (108.22) are the components of a 4-vector, i.e. under the LoRENTZ transformation (107.5) they transform according to 
t; = A,./,. ( 1 08.24) 
We use this frequency 4-vector /, to define the 4-momentum ~ of a photon, 
writing kv · k 
~=C2ne, M4 = ~/, (108.25) 
where h is PLANCK's constant, v is the frequency of the photon, and ne is a unit 
3-vector in the direction of the photon's motion, so that the photon's 3-velocity 
is cne. 
The components of~ have the dimensions of a mass. We define 
relative momentum (3-momentum) of photon = kv ne , c 
relative energy of photon= E = hv. 
Note that ~~ = - m2 for a material particle, } 
~~ = 0 for a photon. (108.26) 
109. Equations of motion of a particle. If a 4-force X, acts on a particle, we 
assume its equation of motion to be 
d 
ds (mA.,) =X,. 
By (108.12) this leads to 
dm Ts =-X, A.,, 
and so the proper mass changes unless 
X,A.,=O, 
(109.1) 
(109.2) 
(109.3) 
which is the condition of orthogonality of the 4-force and the 4-velocity. 
Using the relationship y ds = c dt, we can write the first three ofthe Eq.(109.1) 
in the form 
(109.4) 
a quasi-Newtonian formula giving the rate of change of relative momentum. 
The last of (109.1) gives 
dE d( 2) .cax, -=- myc = -~-- dt dt y • (109.5) 
204 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 110. 
a formula for the rate of change of relative energy. If (109.3) is satisfied, we have 
(109.6) 
and hence 
(109.7) 
a formula connecting the rate of change of relative energy with the rate of change 
of relative momentum. 
The orthogonality condition (109.3) is satisfied (and hence proper mass is 
conserved) if the 4-force depends on 4-velocity in the form 
X,= Y,.A.. • 
where Y,. is a skew-symmetric tensor, so that 
Y,. =-Y.,. 
(109.8) 
(109.9) 
This type of 4-force occurs in the case of a charged particle moving in an electromagnetic field ( cf. Sects. 115, 116). 
110. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics. Instead of laying down equations of motion of the form ( 109.1), we can base relativistic dynamics on a Lagrangian or Hamiltonian, using the methods of PartE, which are sufficiently 
general for relativistic application. Since we are dealing with a single particle, 
we put N = 3 ; configuration space Q becomes the instantaneous space of a 
Galileian observer, and the space of events QT becomes space-time itself. The 
other representative spaces listed in Sect. 62 are also available for the description 
of relativistic dynamics. In particular, the 8-dimensional space QTPH seems 
of interest, but we shall here use only QT and PH, with reference to Q for the 
physical interpretation of the formulae. 
We shall use Minkowskian coordinates as in (107-3); we recall that small 
Latin suffixes range 1, 2, 3, 4 and small Greek suffixes range 1, 2, 3, with the 
summation convention. All general formulae can easily be translated into real 
curvilinear coordinates :x' as in (107.1). 
Some essential formulae from PartE will now be restated, with a certain 
change in sign [cf. (110.4) and (110.8) below]; this change in sign is discussed 
in Sect. 111. 
Consider any timelike curve in space-time with a parameter X increasing from 
past to future. Let A (:x, :x') be a given invariant homogeneous1 Lagrangian, 
where :x; = d:x,Jd X· The Lagrangian action is 
AL =fA (x, x') dx, (110.1) 
the value being independent of the choice of the parameter X· The first form 
of HAMILTON'S principle is [ cf. (65.4)] 
(} f A(x, x') dx = o (Ho.z) 
for fixed end events, and this gives the Lagrangian equations of motion 
~~A-~= 0 (110.3) dz ox; ox, ' 
identically related as in (65.7). We have then a Lagrangian relativistic dynamics 
based on a chosen Lagrangian; relativity appears only in the demand that the 
Lagrangian should be invariant under LORENTZ transformations. 
1 Positive homogeneous of degree 1 in x;. 
Sect. 110. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics. 205 
Alternatively, we can put relativistic dynamics on a Hamiltonian basis. Let 
y, be a Hamiltonian 4-vector 1 associated with an event x,. As in (68.1), but with 
a change in sign 2, we define the Hamiltonian action along any curve in spacetime to be 
Let 
AH = - J y,dx,. 
Q(x, y) = 0 
(110.4) 
(110.5) 
be an invariant energy equation. The second form of HAMILTON's principle is 
[cf. (68.5)] t:5 J y,dx, = 0, Q(x,y) =0. 
This leads to canonical Hamiltonian equations of the form 
dx, 
dw 
aQ 
ay,, 
dy, 
dw 
(110.6) 
(110.7) 
where w is a special parameter. Given an initial event x, and an initial Hamiltonian 4-vector y, satisfying (110.5), the Eqs. (110.7) determine a world line 
with a field of vectors y, along it. This establishes a Hamiltonian relativistic 
dynamics, based on a chosen energy equation; relativity demands the in variance 
of that equation under LORENTZ transformations. 
We have now three different ways of setting up relativistic dynamics. First, 
with a 4-force as in Sect. 109; secondly, by choosing a homogeneous Lagrangian 
A (x, x'); and thirdly, by choosing an energy equation Q (x, y) = 0. 
As in Sect. 69, we reconcile these last two. Making a change in sign consequent 
on the change already made in (110.4), we pass from A(x, x') to Q(x, y) =0 
by writing [cf. (69.3)] a A 
Yr =-ax; I (110.8) 
and eliminating the derivatives x;; and we pass from Q (x, y) = 0 to A (x, x') 
by writing down [cf. (69.14)] 
I {} aQ 
x,= -a-· 
y, 
A=- y,x;, Q(x, y) = 0, (110.9) 
and eliminating y, and{}. With this reconciliation, Lagrangian dynamics and 
Hamiltonian dynamics are one, and the common action is 
A=J A(x,x')dx=- Jy,dx,. (110.10) 
In Lagrangian dynamics there are two important special choices of the parameter x, viz. X= s and X= t. The former is good for general theory, being LoRENTZ-invariant; the latter is good for making comparisons between relativistic 
dynamics and Newtonian dynamics. 
If x=s, then A(x, x') dx =A(x, dx) =A(x, A) ds, 
where A,=dx,!ds, the 4-velocity. The action is 
A= JA(x, A) ds, 
(110.11) 
(110.12) 
1 There is a risk of confusion of terminology in calling y, the momentum-energy 4-vector, 
because it includes a contribution from the field acting on the particle [cf. (115.9)l By 
analogy with HAMILTON's optics, y, might be called the slowness 4-vector; cf. J L. SYNGE: 
Geometrical Mechanics and DE BROGLIE Waves, p. 8. Cambridge: University Press 1954. 
2 It is desirable to arrange that action is positive when y, and dx, are both timelike 
vectors, pointing into the future; under those circumstances we have y,dx,<O. and for 
that reason the minus sign is inserted in the definition ( 110.4). See also Sect. 111. 
206 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
and LAGRANGE's equations read 
_!_OA_OA=O 
ds a.A., ax, ' 
with the special relation J.,J.,= -1. 
Sect. 110. 
(110.13) 
(110.14) 
Some caution must be used. In carrying out the first partial differentiation in 
(110.13), we must employ a form of A homogeneous of the first degree in the 
4-velocity. Should we at any time simplify A by means of (110.14), destroying 
the formal homogeneity, we must again use the same equation to restore that 
homogeneity before differentiating. 
If x=t, we can write 
A(x,x')dx=A(x,dx) =Ldt, (110.15) 
the ordinary Lagrangian L, so defined, being a function of the seven quantities 
xe, t,xe. The action is given by A= J Ldt, (110.
16) 
and LAGRANGE's equations have the familiar form 
(110.17) 
Note that the relativistic requirement is the LORENTZ-invariance of Ldt, not of 
L itself; L is an invariant divided by the fourth component of a 4-vector, a 
curious requirement automatically satisfied if we generate Las in (110.15) from 
an invariant homogeneous Lagrangian. 
In the Hamiltonian method, we may solve .Q(x, y) =0 for y4 , obtaining 
(110.18) 
(as the fourth component of a Minkowskian vector, y4 is a pure imaginary). 
Define Pe and H by H=~· i ' (110.19) 
then ( 11 0.18) gives us the Hamiltonian 
H = cw(x1 , X2, X3, t, P1 , P2, P3) · (110.20) 
It is hard to find an unambiguous suggestive name for the 3-vector p!J. In 
the case of a free particle (cf. Sect. 111), Pe is the relative momentum or 3-momentum defined in Sect.108. But when a charged particle moves in an electromagnetic field (cf. Sect. 115), the field contributes toPe· Probably Hamiltonian 
3-momentum is the most satisfactory name for Pe. 
The action now reads 
(110.21) 
This agrees with the usual expression (68.1) for Hamiltonian action except for a 
reversal of sign; ( 110.21) gives a positive element of action for a particle instantaneous at rest (dxe = 0), provided H is positive. 
The canonical Hamiltonian equations have the familiar form 
. aH Pe=- ---;--· 
uXe 
(110.22) 
Note that the relativistic requirement is that H should transform as the fourth 
component of a 4-vector, not that it should be a LORENTZ-invariant. 
Sect. 111. The free particle. 207 
111. The free particle. In relativistic dynamics, the theory associated with 
a free particle is not trivial, for it serves as a link between physical concepts and 
the mathematical developments. 
For a free particle with constant proper mass m, we choose the invariant 
homogeneous Lagrangian 
A (x, x') = me V- x; x;, 
so that the element of action is 
(111.1) 
A(x, x') dz =me V- x;x;dx =me V-dx,dx,=meds=me-v=;._,).,ds. (111.2) 
Note that this has the correct dimensions for action, [MPT-1]. 
LAGRANGE's equations (110.13) give 
d)., =0 
ds ' (111.3) 
so that the world line is straight. 
For the Hamiltonian 4-vector we have, as in (110.8), 
oA mcx~ 
y,= --w= v I I> 
r -x,.x,. 
(111.4) 
and elimination gives the energy equation 
2!J(x, y) = y,y, + m2 e2 = 0, (111.5) 
from which the space-time coordinates are absent; the canonical equations ( 11 0.7) 
give 
dx, dy, = O. dW=y,, dw (111.6) 
We can write (111.4) in terms of 4-velocity: 
y,=meA.,. (111.7) 
Thus the Hamiltonian 4-vector is tangent to the world line in the case of a free 
particle; this is not generally true for a particle in a field. From ( 1 08.6), ( 11 0.19) 
and (111.7), we see that the Hamiltonian 3-momentum is 
(111.8) 
and we have also . iE y,=~mye=c' (111.9) 
where E is the relative energy, as in Sect. 108. By (110.19) we have then 
H=E. (111.10) 
To find the form of the Hamiltonian function, we are to solve (111.5) for y4 , 
obtaining 
(111.11) 
in which the+ sign is to be chosen on account of (111.9). Then, as in (110.20), 
the· Hamiltonian is 
H=eVPoPo+mzez. (111.12) 
208 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 111. 
It remains to consider the ordinary Lagrangian for a free particle. Applying 
{110.15) to {111.2), we get 
so that 
mc2 
L dt = mcds = -dt, 
y 
mc2 R2 1 L = -~ = mc2 1 --= mc2 - - mv2 + · · · 
y c2 2 
the unwritten terms involving the square and higher powers of vjc. 
This differs in three ways from the Lagrangian 
L=T=imv2 
(111.13) 
(111.14) 
(111.15) 
of a free particle in Newtonian dynamics. First, through the presence of the 
constant m c2 , representing proper energy; secondly, through the minus sign 
in -jmv2 ; and thirdly, through the terms not written explicitly. If the 
Lagrangian is merely an integrand to be used in a variational equation for 
the determination of equations of motion, then the presence of mc2 is trivial, 
since it gives the same contribution to JL dt for all the varied motions; nor is 
the sign in - imv2 significant, since - L yields the same extremals as L. As for 
the unwritten terms, they represent the sort of relativistic correction one expects 
to find, tending to zero with vfc. 
But if action itself is physically significant, then the difference between ( 111.14) 
and (111.15) is significant. For a particle at rest, (111.14) gives a positive action 
mc2 Jdt, whereas (111.15) gives zero. If we compare two particles, one at rest 
and the other moving, (111.14) ascribes the greater action (in a given time interval) 
to the particle at rest, whereas ( 111.15) ascribes the greater action to the moving 
particle. 
Let us return to the change of sign introduced in (110.4) and consequentially 
in ( 11 0.8), and consider the definition of the Hamiltonian 4-vector when the 
coordinates are real. 
If we use real coordinates x' in space-time, we have to distinguish between 
covariant and contravariant vectors, the transition from the one to the other 
being effected by means of the fundamental tensor gmn of (107.1). However, 
the geometry of space-time is not changed if we reverse the signs of all the quantities gmn· Hence, when we diagonalize gmn by using real Cartesian coordinates, 
there are two choices: we can take the diagonal form to be 
or we can take it to be 
(gmn) = ( + 1, + 1, + 1, - 1), 
(gmn) = (- 1, - 1, - 1, + 1). 
( 111.16) 
(111.17) 
Some writers prefer the first, some the second. There is no physical difference 
between them, but ( 111.16) has the advantage that we can pass to the unit matrix 
(Minkowskian coordinates) by introducing one imaginary coordinate, whereas 
( 111.17) requires three imaginary coordinates. Now, with real coordinates and 
gmn and gmn respectively as above, we would write (111.1) as 
(111.18) 
and partial differentiation gives in each case the same covariant vector: 
(111.19) 
Sect. 112. The two-event characteristic function and the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation. 209 
This single covariant vector yields two (opposed) contravariant vectors, according as we use (111.16) or (111.17); they are, respectively, 
( 111.20) 
The first of these points into the past, the second into the future. Now 
there are two possible definitions of the covariant Hamiltonian 4-vector, viz. 
y,= ± oAjox'', and it is convenient to choose that sign which makes the corresponding contravariant 4-vector point into the future, at least in the case of a 
free particle. Thus we need two different definitions of y, according as we use 
( 111.16) or ( 111.17) : they are 
OA 
y, = - ox'' for (111.16}' (111.21) 
OA 
y,= ox'' for (111.17). (111.22) 
In Minkowskian coordinates we do not have to distinguish between covariant 
and contravariant vectors; we have already seen that ( 111.21) is the appropriate 
definition, since (111.7} shows that y,, so defined, points into the future. 
112. The two-event characteristic function and the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation. 
The two-event characteristic function S(x*, x) is, as in (72.1) with a change of 
sign, S(x*, x) =- J y,dx,, 
integrated along the trajectory joining the two events. Hence 
as y,=-~· , * as 
y, = a-x•-. , 
(112.1) 
( 112.2) 
Substitution m the energy 
equation 
equation .Q (x, y) = 0 gives the HAMIL TON-JACOBI 
.Q(x,- ~~)=o. (112.3) 
If, as in Sect. 77, we have a complete integral S(x*, x) of (112.3), then the 
Eqs. (112.2) determine the trajectories and associated Hamiltonian 4-vectors; in 
these equations we are to regard the quantities (x*, y*) as constants. Actually 
we need only six constants, since there are oo6 trajectories. If one of the (x*) 
is taken additive to S, and the other three (x*! and the first three of the (y*) 
chosen arbitrarily, then the first three equations in the second set in (112.2) 
give a trajectory, and indeed all the trajectories, since six arbitrary constants 
are involved. 
For a free particle as in Sect. 11"1, we have 
S(x*, x) = - y. (x,- x:), 
y, being constant along the trajectory. Putting 
s = V- (x,- x:) (x,- x:), 
we have, as in (111.7) _ A _ me (x,- xi) y,- me ,- 5 , 
and hence S(x*, x) =me V- (x,- x:) (x,- x:) = mes. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 14 
(112.4) 
(112.5) 
(112.6) 
(112.7) 
1/ 
210 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sects. 113. 114. 
II. Some special dynamical problems. 
113. Hyperbolic motion. In Newtonian dynamics we can prescribe the motion 
of a particle, and calculate the force that gives this motion. Similarly, in relativity 
we can prescribe a world line and calculate the corresponding 4-force consistent 
with given constant proper mass of the particle, using the formula 
(113.1) 
One of the simplest world lines is the pseudocircle with equations 
(113.2) 
where a is a constant. Since the first equation reads, in real coordinates, 
(113.3) 
this is called hyperbolic motion (Fig. 52). The parametric 
equations of the world line are 
x1 = aCosq;, x4 = ia Sin q;, 
and hence d s2 = - dx~ - dx~ = a2 d q;2, 
(113.4) 
(113.5) 
so that the surviving components of the 4-velocity are 
~ dxl s· ,., =~= 1nm ds T' 
~ dx4 • C A4 = d5 = t osq;. (113.6) 
By (113.1) the required 4-force is 
X = _m_ Cos m = _!I'IX 1 a T a2 1 • 1 
X im s· mx, 4=---a mq;=~, 
X2 =X3 =0. j 
(113.7) 
Fig. 52. Hyperbolic motion 
Thus the 4-force is directed from the origin of space-time, with a magnitude proportional to the Minkowskian distance. 
114. Particle in a potential field. Harmonic oscillator. Let V(x1 , x2 , x3) be 
a potential function, and let 
, _ v--, iV x~ A(x , x) -me -x , x-., ----- c (114.1) 
be the homogeneous Lagrangian for a particle of constant proper mass m moving 
in this field. This expression is not LORENTZ-invariant; we are using a special 
frame of reference. 
We can write ·--- iVl A (x .A) =me V-A A _,_ _ ___!_ I 1 t C I 
and the corresponding ordinary Lagrangian L is given by 
Ldt=A(x,dx} -:-mcds+ Vdt,) 
L =me + V. 
I' 
(114.2) 
(114.3) 
Sect. 114. Particle in a potential field. Harmonic oscillator. 211 
By (110.13) the equations of motion are 
ds d (- md) + i 
c u~ 
~v ;.4 = 0' l 
d ( i v) -ds - me }.4 - c = 0, 
( 114.4) 
so that 
Jt (myve) =- ·~~, l 
myc2 +V = K, 
(114.5) 
where K is a constant (constant of energy). 
To discuss a harmonic oscillator, we consider motion along the xcaxis with 
V = i k2 x~. Let the particle start from the origin with v = v0 • Then, by the last 
of (114.5), we have 
(114.6) 
The particle comes to rest at x =a (we put x1 = x for simplicity) where a is given by 
(114.7) 
and the constants v0 and a are related by 
1 mc2 l 
K = mc2 + 2 k2 a2 = v1 ---~~ , 
1 1 ~ ·2-- k2 a2 = mc2(Yo- 1)' y j 0 = v~c.~~~! . 
(114.8) 
By (114.6) we have 
~ = v~(K~~~~~~ -, (114.9) 
and so the period -c of the harmonic oscillator is given by 
x=a a 
T = 4 J d t = 4 J d;-
x=O o a 
= -:- I v(Il~ ~)~~: ~ (114.10) 
0 
where 
(114.11) 
The formula (114.10) is exact; expanding in powers of x, we get 
ym ( 3 k2a2 ) 
-c = 2 n -k- 1 + -16 -mc2 + · · · ' (114.12) 
in which the first term is the Newtonian period. 
14* 
212 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 115. 
115. Charged particle in electromagnetic field. An electromagnetic field with 
electric vector Ee and magnetic vector HP can be described by a skew-symmetric 
tensor F.s where E1 = iF14 , 
H1 = F;a, 
the corresponding 4-potential rp, is such that 
F.s= rrs,r- rrr,s> 
the commas denoting partial differentiation. 
(115.1) 
(115.2) 
For a particle of constant proper mass m and charge e, moving in a given 
electromagnetic field 1, we take the homogeneous Lagrangian 
A (x, x') =me v=-.x;.x;- ~ rp,x;, 
or, in terms of 4-velocity, 
A (x, A) =me V-A,~~-~ rp,Ar 
The corresponding ordinary Lagrangian is 
mc2 e • L =-~-·· rp, X+ v l' c Q Q ' 
where 
v = I!Cf!4 
i ' 
the potential energy of the particle. 
The equations of motion (110.13) give 
(115.3) 
(115.4) 
(115.5) 
( 115.6) 
(115.7) 
The term on the right is the LORENTZ ponderomotive force. This equation is 
of the form (109.1), and the condition (109.3) for constancy of proper mass is 
satisfied on account of the skew-symmetry of the electromagnetic tensor. These 
equations may also be expressed in the vector form [cf. (40.1), (40.2)]: 
:de (myv) =e(E+: xH), l 
(115.8) 
lit(mye2) =ev·E. 
To get the energy equation Q(x, y) =0, we write the equation for the Hamiltonian 4-vector 
{115.9) 
and so obtain (since A,A,=-1) 
2f2(x, y) = (y,- ~ rp,) (y,- d rp,) + m2e2 = o. (115.10) 
The canonical equations are 
dx, 8Q e l ;~ ~ ~·;;, y, ·; (::~ : ~.) ~ •.• 
(115.11) 
1 The units are electrostatic. 
Sect. 116. Relativistic KEPLER problem. 213 
By (110.20) the Hamiltonian is [we solve (115.10) for y4] 
H = c~, = V ± c V(Pe -~- IPe)(Pe- ~-q;e) + m2c2. (115.12) 
The Hamiltonian 3-momentum is 
e Pe =my vii+ r;IP11· (115.13) 
By (112.3) and (115.10), the HAMILTON-jACOBI equation is 
(os e )(os e ) -+-IP --+--IP + m2c2= 0. ox, c , ox, c , (115.14) 
In the case of an electrostatic field, we put !p11 =0, eqJ4=iV; then we have 
--;(as- v)2 +~~ + m2c2= o. c ot axil OXe (115.15) 
In terms of a complete integral, the motion is given by (112.2). 
116. Relativistic KEPLER problem. Consider a particle, of constant proper 
mass m and chargee, moving in the field of a charge e' of opposite sign, fixed 
at the origin. If e, e' are measured in Gaussian electrostatic units, the field 
and 4-potential are 
(116.1) 
The equations of motion ( 11 5 .8) give 
d k'l' 
Tt(yv) =--;a· 
d k 
dt (y c2) = - rs v. 'I'. (116.2) 
where r is the position vector of the moving charge and 
ee' k=-->0. m (116.3) 
It follows that the motion is plane, and if we use polar coordinates (r, {)) in the 
plane of the orbit, we get an integral of angular momentum 
and an integral of energy 
k "c2 --=W r r ' 
(116.4) 
(116.5) 
where A and W are constants. Putting f! = 1/r and eliminating the time, the 
differential equation of the orbit comes out to be1 
(116.6) 
Assuming the coefficient of e to be positive, and putting 
(116.7) 
1 Cf. BERGMANN, p. 218 of op. cit. in Sect. 107; SYNGE, p. 398 of op. cit. in Sect. 107. 
214 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 116. 
we obtain the equation of the orbit in the form 
- = 1 n = -~-c [(W--- p · cos (p {} + C) + - 2 )~ kW] r o: Ap2 c4 Ac3 ' (116.8) 
where C is a constant. 
The condition for a finite orbit is 
- c2< W<c 2 • (116.9) 
The finite orbit may be regarded as a rotating ellipse with one focus at the origin, 
the advance of perihelion per revolution being 
If the velocity is small, this is approximately 
4:n:3a2 
c2-r2(1- s2) ' 
(116.10) 
(116.11) 
where a is the semi-axis major, r the period, and e the eccentricity; this is one 
sixth of the rotation given by the general theory of relativity for the motion of 
a planet in the gravitational field of the sun. 
The solution of the relativistic KEPLER problem may also be obtained by 
separation of variables in the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation 1. Transformed to polar 
coordinates (r, {}, cp), (115.15) reads 
where 
V = ee' 
r 
We get a complete integral by putting 
5 = a1 + 51 (r, a2 , a4) + 52 (fJ, a2 , a3) + a3 cp + a4 t, 
(116.12) 
(116.13) 
(116.14) 
the functions 51 and 52 being found by quadratures to satisfy the equations 
(116.15) 
Here the a's are arbitrary constants. As in (112.2), the motion is given by 
b =t+Y~l 4 8a4 ' (116.16) 
where the b's are arbitrary constants. These three equations give r, {}, cp as 
functions oft and the six arbitrary constants a 2 , a3 , a4 , b2 , b3 , b4 • 
1 Cf. A. SOMMERFELD, pp. 251-258 of op. cit. in Sect. 99, where the problem is approached 
in a slightly different way. 
Sect. 117. Coherent systems of trajectories in space-time and associated waves. 215 
Ill. DE BROGLIE waves. 
117. Coherent systems of trajectories in space-time and associated waves. The 
theory of Sects. 74 and 75 can be applied to space-time, with the alteration 
in sign indicated in Sect. 110 and discussed in Sect. 111. The essential steps 
are as follows. · 
\Ve lay down an energy equation 
D(x, y) = 0. (117.1) 
For a free particle, this reads, as in (111.5), 
2D = y, y, + m2 c2 = o; (117.2) 
for a charged particle in an electromagnetic field we have the more complicated 
Eq. (115.10); for a particle in a potential field, as in Sect.114, we have 
( "V )2 2D=Y0 Y0+ -~ +m2 c2 =0. 
The trajectories are given by the canonical equations 
dx, - o!J 
(iii) - -ay~, 
(117.3) 
(117.4) 
Picking out some set of trajectories, forming a subspace R of space-time, we 
associate with each event in R the Hamiltonian 4-vector y, belonging to the 
trajectory passing through that event; this y, may be found from the first set 
of equations in (117.4). or equivalently from the equations 
OA 
Y,=- -ox''. (117.5) 
where A (x, x') is the homogeneous Lagrangian corresponding to the energy 
equation (117.1). This set of trajectories forms a coherent system if 
cj)- y,dx,= 0 (117.6) 
for every reducible circuit in R. The one-event characteristic function for the 
coherent system is defined as 
U(x) =- J y,dx,, (117.7) 
the integral being taken along any curve in R, starting from some event which 
is fixed once for all and ending at the event x, where U is evaluated. 
Taking R to be a simply connected 4-dimensional region in space-time, and 
varying the event x,, we have, as in (74.8} with a change of sign, 
au y,=-~· ux, 
U satisfies the HAMILTON-JACOBI equation 
D(x,- ~~) = 0, 
and the waves belonging to the coherent system have the equations 
U(x) = const. 
(117.8) 
(117.9) 
(117.10) 
Note that the Hamiltonian 4-vector y, is normal to the 3-wave in the space-time 
sense. 
These waves are DE BROGLIE waves in the sense of geometrical mechanics. 
216 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sects. 118,119. 
118. Particle velocity and wave velocity. By (108.9} and (117.8), the normal 
velocity of propagation of the wave U = const is 
u = -ic YeY, 
e Ya Ya ' (118.1} 
and, as in (108.10}, the speed u satisfies 2 1-!___ = YrYr (118.2} u2 ' y: . By (117.4) the particle velocity is 
_ · dxe- · o!Jfoye (1183} vQ- ~ c dx, - ~ c oQfoy, . . 
The connection between wave velocity uQ and particle velocity ve is to be 
found (at any event x,) by eliminating the four quantities y, from the seven 
equations contained in (117.1), (118.1) and (118.3). 
ct For a free particle, with Q as in (117.2}, the 
particle velocity is, by (118.3), 
(118.4) 
JA1, This has the same direction in space as the wave 
velocity ue given by ( 118.1) ; this direction is also 
that of the Hamiltonian 3-momentum Pe. The 
relation between the two speeds (u for the wave 
and v for the particle) is 
u v = ue ve = c2 , 
the DE BROGLIE equation1 • 
(118.5} 
119. The DE BROGLIE wavelength and frequency. 
Fig.sJ.DEBaoGLIEwaveswithperiodBC/c. Let L be the world line of a particle in a coherent 
system (Fig. 53), and let ~,»;be two DE BROGLIE 
3-waves cutting L at the events A, B respectively. Let these waves be chosen 
so that the action along AB ish (PLANCK's constant). 
Regarding h as infinitesimal, we have then 
- y,dx,= h, (119.1) 
where y, is the Hamiltonian 4-vector associated with L at A and dx, is the displacement AB. If CB is drawn parallel to the time-axis, with C on VIi;_, then 
the period 1: of the DE BROGLIE waves is 
BC 
7: =- (119.2) c ' 
where BC is a Minkowskian separation. 
By (117.8), y, is orthogonal to the wave ~. Therefore, since the displacement AB is the vector sum of the displacements AC and BC, we have from 
(119.1) - y,d~,= h, (119.3) 
where d~, is the displacement CB. But this last displacement is parallel to the 
time-axis, and so d~Q = O, d~, = i BC. ( 119.4) 
1 For the more complicated relationship between the two velocities for a charged particle 
in an electromagnetic field, see SYNGE, p. 90 of op. cit. in Sect. 110. 
Sect. 120. 
Therefore (119.3) gives 
and 
Conservation of 4-momentum. 
BC= __ h_ 
iy4 
h 
T= --.-. 
~cy4 
217 
(119.5) 
( 119.6) 
This expression for the period of the DE BROGLIE waves 1s approximate, 
since we took h to be infinitesimal. 
In the case of a free particle, we have, as in ( 111. 7), 
y4=mcA4=imyc, (119.7) 
and so the period -r and the frequency 11 are such that 
h 
-r=-- h11=myc2 • (119.8) myc2 ' 
Since the speed of the waves is u = c2jv, the DE BROGLIE wavelength is 
A= u T = _h_. (119.9) 
myv 
These expressions are accurate in the simplest case of all, viz. when the world 
lines of the coherent system are parallel and the waves are, in consequence, 
plane and parallel. 
Passing back to the general case of a particle moving in accordance with any 
energy equation Q (x, y) = 0, or equivalently with a Hamiltonian H, we get from 
(110.19) and (119.6) h h 
T =--=- h11 =H. (119.10) icy4 H' 
IV. Relativistic catastrophes. 
120. Conservation of 4-momentum. In this discussion of catastrophes, the 
word particle includes both a material particle with 4-momentum 
M __ myvQ M . iE e c ' 4=2my=7 (120.1) 
and a photon with 4-momentum 
M _ ihv 4- c2 ' ( 120.2) 
as in Sect. 108, all these components having the dimensions of a mass. By the 
word catastrophe we understand a collision or encounter of several particles, 
from which perhaps the number of particles emerging differs from the number 
coming in, or an explosion, in which one particle turns into several particles. 
The basic assumption is the law of conservation of 4-momentum, which may 
be written L M; = L M,, (120.3) 
where the summation on the right extends over all the particles before the catastrophe, and the summation on the left over all the particles after the catastrophe; 
the two numbers need not be the same. This law may be written equivalently 
( 120.4) 
L m' y' c2 + L h 11' = L my c2 + L h 11, ( 120.5) 
where (120.4) expresses the conservation of relative momentum and (120.5) 
the conservation of relative energy. The laws are valid for all Galileian frames 
of reference. 
218 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 120. 
Until we come to Sect. 123, there is no necessity to assume that the world 
lines of the participating particles intersect at a catastrophe; the conservation 
equation (120.3) makes no reference to the positions of the particles. 
It is profitable to think of the 4-dimensional space PH in which the coordinates of a point are M, and which has the same geometry as space-time, the only 
difference being that the origin of PH is a physically distinguishable point, 
whereas the origin of space-time is not. We have 
M,M,= -m2 (120.6) 
(m=O for a photon), and this provides the metric in PH. Viewed in this way, 
the Eq. (120.3) presents a very simple picture in PH, analogous to the polygon 
of forces in statics; a single resultant vector is broken down in two different 
ways, one corresponding to the initial state and 
the other to the final state. Fig. 54 shows a catastrophe with two initial particles and three final 
inilrill fiilul particles. 
0 
Fig. 54. Vector diagram of a catastrophe, drawn in the space PH, showing 
the conservation of 4~momentum. 
Regarding the initial state as given, we have in 
(120.3) four equations to determine the final state. 
There may be supplementary conditions, the proper 
masses of the final particles being assigned, but, 
even with such conditions, there is only one case 
in which the final state is determinate, and that is 
when there is only one final particle. Its 4-momentum 
is given by 
M;=I,M,, ( 120.7) 
and its proper mass by 
m' 2 = -M;M;. ( 120.8) 
If there are two final particles, and we are told what their proper masses are, 
we have in all six equations, viz. four in (120.3) and two equations of the type 
( 120.8); this leaves two degrees of freedom in the final state, the same as in the 
collision of two elastic spheres in Newtonian dynamics when the direction of the 
line of centres is unspecified. 
If the material particles resulting from a catastrophe are brought to rest, 
without changing their proper masses, and any photons resulting from the catastrophe are allowed to escape, then there remains in hand a total relative energy 
I, m' c2• Thus the loss of relative energy is 
Q = I, h v + I, my c2 - I, m' c2 • (120.9) 
If the catastrophe is the explosion of a single particle at rest, of proper mass m, 
then 
Q = m c2 - I, m' c2 ; (120.10) 
Q is the binding energy of the exploding particle (some writers prefer to 
use - Q). 
The mass-centre frame of reference, or reference system, is that Galileian frame 
which has the total4-momentum, I,M,, for time-axis. When this frame is used, 
the right hand side of (120.4) is zero. The use of this frame sometimes simplifies 
calculations, but of course it does not affect the question of determinacy in the 
result of the catastrophe. 
Sect. 121. Inelastic and elastic collisions. 219 
121. Inelastic and elastic collisions. In a completely inelastic collision, all the 
incident particles coalesce into a single particle, with 4-momentum 
M; = L M,, (121.1) 
and proper mass m' given by m' 2 = -M;M;. ( 121.2) 
If the number of incident particles is two, with proper masses m, m and 4-momenta M,, M,, then the proper mass of the single final particle is given by 
m' 2 =-(M,+ M,) (M:_,+M,) } 
= m2 +m2 - 2M,M,. (121.3) 
If, in particular, the incident particles are photons with frequencies v, v 
travelling in directions given by the unit vectors nQ' nQ' then we get 
m '2-2h2vii(1 - -- -n n -)~ c' Q e 
h2 -
= 4 ~ sin2 -1_ {} c4 2 ' 
( 121.4) 
where {} is the angle between the lines of motion of the photons. This represents 
the creation of a single particle of matter from two photons. If we use the masscentre reference system, we have v=v, {}=n, and so 
m'c2 = 2hv, (121.5) 
as is indeed obvious, since the final particle must be at rest, with energy m' c2, 
and the total energy of the photons is 2hv. 
In a completely inelastic collision of two material particles, 
velocities ve, ve, (121.3) gives 
m' 2 = m2 + m2 + 2mmyy (1- v~~g_), 
where 
It is easy to show that 
1 
y= v~ v2 ' 
1--
c2 
- 1 
y = ~~- -2 • 
_ _11_ 
c2 
- ( v v ) yy 1- ~/ > 1 
moving with 
( 121.6) 
(121.7) 
( 121.8) 
(equality occurs only if ve = v~, in which case there is no collision), and hence 
m'>m+m. (121.9) 
Thus total proper mass is always increased in a completely inelastic collision. 
The increase in total proper energy is 
m' c2 - m c2 - m c2 ; (121.10) 
if the speeds of the incident particles are small compared with c, it is easy to 
show that this increase is approximately equal to the heat generated in such 
a collision according to Newtonian dynamics (cf. Sects. 58, 59). 
A completely inelastic collision of a material particle and a photon is similarly 
treated. This represents absorption of a photon by a material particle. Here 
also the total proper mass is increased; since the proper mass of the photon is 
zero, this means that we get a material particle with a greater proper mass than 
that of the incident material particle. 
220 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 122. 
An elastic collision is characterized by two conditions: 
(i) The number of particles is unchanged. 
(ii) The proper mass of each particle is unchanged. 
The result of an elastic collision between two material particles is very easy to 
describe in the mass-centre reference system: the speeds of the particles are 
unchanged, and they recede from the collision in opposite directions, the line of 
these directions being undetermined by the conservation law. The vector diagram 
in the space PH is as in Fig. 55. In the elastic collision of a material particle 
iniliol 
0 
final 
and a photon (the CoMPTON effect, see 
Sect. 122), the frequency of the photon 
is unchanged when the mass-centre reference system is used. 
122. CoMPTON effect. An elastic collision between a material particle and a 
photon is called the COMPTON effect. As 
indicated in Sect. 120, there is a twofold 
indeterminary in the result of the collision. 
Fig. 55. Vector diagram of elastic collision. Fig. 56. CoMPTON effect in the laboratory frame of reference. 
To discuss the collision in a general Galileian frame of reference, we write 
M,, M; for the 4-momenta of the material particle before and after the collision, 
and P,., P; for the 4-momenta of the photon. We have the following equations: 
M; ~P~=M,+ ~·- 2 ) 
M,M,- M,M,- m, 
P; P; = P,P,= 0. 
( 122.1) 
These six equations contain all the information available for the determination 
of the eight quantities M;, P;. 
The description of the outcome of the collision depends on the frame of reference employed. The description is simplest for the mass-centre reference system 
(see Sect. 121}, but in the usual description, as given below, one uses the laboratory 
frame, i.e. the frame in which the particle is initially at rest!. 
Fig. 56 shows the photon (with frequency v) approaching from the left, 
and being scattered (with frequency V1 ) at an angle {}; the material particle recoils 
with speed V1 at an angle cp as shown. From (120.4) and (120.5) it follows that 
the three lines of motion are coplanar and that 
m Y1 V1 cos cp + !!i_ cos{} = hv , ) c c 
I I • h111 • {} 
my v smq;--c-s1n =0, 
my' c2 + h V1 = m c2 + h v. 
( 122.2) 
1 See J. L. SYNGE, pp. 193-199 of op. cit. in Sect. 107 for further details and descriptions 
in other frames of reference. 
Sect. 123. Angular momentum and mass-centre. 221 
Assuming{} to have any value (this is part of the indeterminacy of the problem), 
we find, after a little calculation, 
where 
t _ cot!D anqJ-~, 
v' _ 2ksinHV1+k(2+k)sin2 !D 
"7:- 1 + 2k (1 + k) sin2 !D 
, 1 1+2k(1+k)sin2 !D 
y = v v;2 = t+2ksin2 !D 
1--C2 
v' = v 
t+2ksin2 lD' 
k - ..!!!'.._ (122.4) - mc2 • 
123. Angular momentum and mass-centre 1• 
Let x, be any event in the history of a particle, 
and let M, be its 4-momentum at that event. 
Then the angular momentum of the particle at 
that event, relative to the origin of the spacetime coordinates, is defined to be the skewsymmetric tensor 
H,.= x,M.- x.M,. (123.1} 
More generally, the angular momentum relative to an event a, is defined to be 
I (122.3) 
H,. (a) = (x,- a,) M.- (x.- a5 ) M, } (123.2) = H,.- a,M. + a.M,. 
Fig. 57. World lines of a system of particles 
interacting at point catastrophes. 
If the particle is free, then its world line is straight and M, lies along it; 
in that case H,. (a) is independent of the particular event x, chosen on the 
world line. 
Consider now a system of particles, interacting with one another only by 
catastrophes in which the world lines intersect. Collisions may be elastic or 
inelastic; particles may combine and new particles may be formed; the particles 
may be material particles or photons. The essential condition is that 4-momentum 
should be conserved at each catastrophe, and that each catastrophe should take 
place at a single event. Fig. 57 illustrates the world lines of such a system. 
Let II be any spacelike 3-space. Let x, be the event where a typical world 
line cuts II, and let M, be the corresponding 4-momentum. Then each world 
line cutting II gives an angular momentum relative to the origin as in (123.1), 
and we get a total angular momentum for the system by adding the contributions of the several particles. 
If we move II in space-time, this total angular momentum certainly remains 
constant until II crosses a catastrophe, because each particle is free between 
catastrophes. Further, there is no change in the total angular momentum when 
II does cross a catastrophe, because only a single event is involved and the total 
4-momentum of the particles involved is conserved. In fact, both the total 
4-momentum and the total angular momentum of the world lines cutting II 
are independent of the choice of II; they are constants of the system. 
1 See the books by Mt11LLER and SYNGE cited in Sect. 107; also C. M0LLER: Ann. Inst. 
H. Poincare 11, 251-278 (1949) and Comm. Dublin Inst. Adv. Studies, Ser. A 1949, No. s. 
222 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. Sect. 124. 
Let us now use for the system the symbols previously employed for a single 
particle, writing 
H,s = total angular momentum relative to the origin, 
H, 5 (a) = total angular momentum relative to a,, 
M, = total 4-momentum. 
We have as in (123.2), but now with an extended meaning, 
H, 5 (a) = H, 5 - a,A[. + a5 M,. 
Consider the four equations 
H, 5 (a)M5 =0, 
(123.3) 
(123.4) 
of which only three are independent on account of the skew-symmetry of H, 5 (a). 
Substitution from (123.3) gives 
(123.5) 
These equations locate a, on a straight line in space-time, with equations 
HrsMs + .o.M 
a,= M M 'If r> 
n " 
(123.6) 
where {} is a variable parameter. This is the history of the mass-centre of the 
system, mass-centre being so defined relativistically. This history is parallel toM,. 
If we use a frame of reference with time-axis parallel to M, (this is the masscentre reference system of Sect. 120), we haveM;,=O; (123.6) gives a mass-centre 
fixed at the point with coordinates -
He4 ( ) ae=M.-. 123.7 4 
If, on the other hand, we leave the directions of the space-time axes arbitrary, 
but move the origin to a position on the history of the mass-centre, then (123.5) 
is satisfied by a,= 0, and therefore 
H, 5 A{.= 0. (123.8) 
124. Particles with spin. The Eq. (123.8) suggests that the spin or intrinsic 
angular momentum of a particle with 4-momentum M, should be represented 
by a skew-symmetric tensor H, s satisfying the condition 
H, 5 A{.= 0. {124.1) 
Then the angular momentum of the particle about any event a, will consist of 
two parts: an orbital angular momentum 
(x,- a,) M.- (xs- as) M, (124.2) 
and a spin angular momentum H, s, satisfying ( 124.1) and independent of the 
choice of origin and of the event a,. 
Any skew-symmetric tensor can be represented by two 3-vectors, and we 
may describe the spin by the two 3-vectors, ~ and He*, where 
H1 =iH14 , =i~ , 
H1* = J4.a, H2* = Hal• {124.3) 
The factor i is inserted here to yield a real 3-vector, 4 being a pure imaginary 
in Minkowskian coordinates. 
General references. 
The four equations contained in (124.1) give the vector equation 
H=H*x_!_ c , 
where v is the velocity of the particle, and also the scalar equation 
H·v=O, 
223 
(124.4) 
(124.5) 
which is of course a consequence of (124.4). By (124.4) the two spin vectors are 
perpendicular to one another. 
If we use the rest frame of the particle, thus making v = 0, we have H = 0 by 
(124.4), and hence only one spin vector, H*. 
The spin tensor yields a LoRENTZ-invariant: 
!)2 = jH,sHrs= H*2- H2. (124.6) 
This expression is always positive, since we can make H = 0 by choice of frame 
of reference, and hence Q is real. 
For a particle moving under the influence of a 4-force X, and a torque Y,s 
(=-Y.,), equations of motion have been proposed1, which read as follows in 
the notation of the present article: 
H, 5 A5 =0, A,A,=-1, } 
M;=X,, H;5 =M,A5 -M.A,+ Y,s; (124.7) 
here A, is the 4-velocity and the prime means dfds along the world line. The 
mass of the particle being defined by m = - M, A,, the above equations imply 
M,= m A,+ H, 5 A; + Y,sAs· (124.8) 
If X,=O and ¥, 5 =0, then M, is a constant 4-vector, and the orbit is a circle 
in that frame of reference for which M1 = M2 = 1\fa = 0. 
I wish to thank Professors C. LANczos and C. TRUESDELL for discussions and advice 
during the preparation of this Article, and Dr. L. BAss for assistance in proof-reading. 
General references. 
This is a selection of textbooks and articles on classical dynamics, with brief notes, each 
of which is intended to give some general indication of the nature of the contents. 
[1]. AMES, J. S., and F. D. MuRNAGHAN: Theoretical Mechanics. Boston: Ginn 1929. -
Vector analysis, including theory of screws. Kinematics. Dynamics of a particle and 
of a rigid body. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian equations. Variational principles. HAMILTON-J ACOiU equation. POISSON brackets. Relativity. 
[2] APPELL, P.: Traite de Mecanique rationnelle. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, Tome I, 1941 
(6th. Edn.); Tome II, 1953 (6th Edn.). - A classical treatise, presenting the subject 
in detail and with great clarity. Sparing use of vector notation. Tome I deals with 
kinematics, statics and the dynamics of a particle. Tome II deals with systems, halonomic and non-holonomic, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian equations with associated 
general theory, shocks and percussions. Three further volumes deal with continuous 
media, rotating fluid masses and tensor calculus. 
[3] CoRBEN, H. C., and P. STEHLE: Classical Mechanics. New York: Wiley, and London: 
Chapman & Hall 1950. - A modern textbook, with emphasis placed on those parts 
of the subject most pertinent to quantum mechanics. Vector and matrix notation 
used. Hamiltonian theory, PoiSSON brackets, and contact transformations. Introduction to special theory of relativity. 
1 J. FRENKEL: Lehrbuch der Elektrodynamik, Bd. 1, p. 353. Berlin: Springer 1926. -
M. MATHISSON: Acta Phys. Polan. 6, 163, 218 (1937). - J. WEYSSENHOFF and A. RAABE: 
Acta Phys. Polan. 9, 7, 19 (1947). - J. WEYSSENHOFF: Acta Phys. Polan. 9, 26, 46 (1947) 
See also 0. C. DE BEAUREGARD, p. 122 of op. cit. in Sect. 107. 
224 J. L. SYNGE: Classical Dynamics. 
[4] FINZI, B.: Meccanica Razionale. 2 volumes. Bologna: Zanichelli 1948. - A general 
textbook on mechanics, with some attention given to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian 
methods. Relativistic mechanics. Statistical mechanics. 
[.5] FRANK, PH.: Analytische Mechanik. Die Differential- und Integralgleichungen der 
Mechanik und Physik, Teil 2, pp. 1-176. Braunschweig: F. Vieweg & Sohn 1927. -
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian equations, transformation theory, HAMILTON-JACOBI 
equation, action-angle variables, stability, rigid motions, perturbations. 
[6] FuEs, E.: Storungsrechnung. GEIGER-SCHEEL, Handbuch der Physik, Vol. V, pp. 131 
to 177. Berlin: Springer 1927. - Multiply periodic motions, action-angle variables, 
degeneracy, adiabatic invariants, development in powers of parameter, secular disturbances, DELAUNAY's method, time-dependent disturbances. 
[7] GoLDSTEIN, H.: Classical Mechanics. Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-Wesley 1950. -
Emphasis on techniques required in quantum mechanics. Matrix and vector notations 
used. Special relativity. Hamiltonian equations, canonical transformations, small 
oscillations, introduction to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations for continuous 
systems and fields. 
[8] GRAMMEL, R.: Kinetik der Massenpunkte. GEIGER-SCHEEL, Handbuch der Physik, 
Vol. V, pp. 305-372. Berlin: Springer 1927. - Dynamics of a particle, free or constrained. Motion relative to rotating earth. Two-body problem. Three-body problem. 
Stability. 
[9] HALPERN, 0.: Relativitii.tsmechanik. GEIGER-SCHEEL, Handbuch der Physik, Vol. V, 
pp. 578-616. Berlin:Springer 1927. - pynamics of a particle and of a continuum in 
special relativity. Light quantum. General relativity. 
[10] HAMEL, G.: Die Axiome der Mechanik. GEIGER-SCHEEL, Handbuch der Physik, Vol. V, 
pp. 1-42. Berlin: Springer 1927. -Newtonian laws. Construction of mechanics from 
continuity hypothesis, from rigid body, from particles. Construction from Lagrangian 
and energetic principles. Non-classical forms of dynamics. Absence of contradictions. 
[11] HAMEL, G.: Theoretische Mechanik. Berlin: Springer 1949. - A comprehensive textbook, with detailed treatments of rigid body, n-body problem and non-holonomic 
systems; 263 pages devoted to problems and their solutions. 
[12] JuNG, G.: Geometrie der Massen. Encyklopii.die der mathematischen Wissenschaften, 
Vol. IV.1, pp. 279-344. Leipzig: Teubner 1901-1908. - A specialized article on 
linear, quadratic and higher moments, with bibliography up to 1903. 
[13] LAMB, H.: Dynamics. Cambridge: University Press 1929 (2nd Edn.).- Elementary textbook, without vector notation, noteworthy for direct simple treatment of plane problems. 
[14] LAMB, H.: Higher Mechanics. Cambridge: University Press 1929 (2nd Edn.).- Sequel 
to [13]. Geometry of finite rotations, screws and wrenches. Motion of rigid body in 
space. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian equations. Vibrations. 
[1.5] LANczos, C.: The Variational Principles of Mechanics. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press 1949. - D' ALEMBERT's principle. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian equations. Canonical transformations. HAMILTON-JACOBI theory. Emphasis on the geometry of phase-space. 
[16] LEVI-CIVITA, T., and U. AMALDI: Lezioni di Meccanica Razionale. Bologna: Zanichelli; Vol. I, 1923; Vol. Il1, 1926; Vol. liz, 1927. - A comprehensive treatise, comparable to APPELL [2]. Vol. I deals with kinematics, geometry of masses, and statics. 
Vol. II1 , deals with dynamics of a particle, LAGRANGE's equations, stability of vibrations. Vol. liz deals with dynamics of a rigid body, Hamiltonian theory, variational 
principles, and impulsive motion. 
[17] MACMILLAN, W. D.: Theoretical Mechanics. New York and London: McGraw-Hill; 
Vol. I, 1927; Vol. II, 1936. - Comprehensive textbook with much detail. Vol. I deals 
with orbits, ballistic trajectories, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian equations and variational 
principles for a particle. Vol. II deals with a rigid body, with fixed point or rolling, 
impulsive forces, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods in general, method of periodic 
solutions. 
[18] NoRDHEIM, L.: Die Prinzipe der Dynamik. GEIGER-SCHEEL, Handbuch der Physik, 
Vol. V, pp. 43-90. Springer: Berlin 1927. - Differential and integral principles, 
virtual work, D'ALEMBERT'S principle, principles of GAUSS, HERTZ, HAMILTON, JACOBI. 
[19] NoRDHEIM, L., and E. FuEs: Die HAMILTON-JACOBische Theorie der Dynamik. GEIGERSCHEEL, Handbuch der Physik, Vol. V, pp. 91-130. Berlin: Springer 1927. - Canonical transformations, POISSON and LAGRANGE brackets, HAMILTON-JACOBI equation, 
eikonal. 
[20] PERES, J.: Mecanique generale. Paris: Masson & Cie. 1953. - Compact textbook 
dealing with moments of inertia, non-holonomic constraints, virtual work, dynamics 
of a particle and of a rigid body, equations of LAGRANGE, APPELL and HAMILTON, 
HAMILTON-JACOBI equation, stability about equilibrium or steady motion. Shocks 
and percussions. 
General references. 225 
[21] PRANGE, G.: Die allgemeinen Integrationsmethoden der analytischen Mechanik. Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften, Vol. IV.2, pp. 505-804. Leipzig: 
Teubner 1904-1935. - Detailed treatment of n'ALEMBERT's principle, LAGRANGE's 
equations, variational principles, variation of constants, HAMILTON's optics, characteristic function, HAMILTON-JACOBI equation, separation of variables, integral invariants, 
systematic integration of canonical systems, canonical transformations, substitution or 
generating functions, equivalent systems. 
[22] RouTH, E. J.: A Treatise on the Dynamics of a System of Rigid Bodies. London: 
Macmillan; Vol. I, 1897 (6th Edn.); Vol. II, 1905 (6th Edn.). German translation by 
A. ScHEPP, Leipzig 1898. Vol. II reprinted by Dover Publications, New York, 1955. -
Although old-fashioned in notation, this book remains the most useful reference for 
miscellaneous special information on the dynamics of rigid bodies. Strings and membranes are also treated. The arrangement is unsystematic, but there is a good index. 
[23] SCHAEFER, CL.: Einfiihrung in die theoretische Physik, Bd. 1. Berlin: W. de Gruyter 
1950 (5th Edn.). - The first 469 pp. of this book treat the dynamics of particles and 
rigid bodies in considerable detail, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods being included. The rest of the book (507 pp.) deals with the mechanics of continua. 
[24] ScHOENFLIES, A., and M. GRDBLER: Kinematik. Encyklopadie der mathematischen 
Wissenschaften, Vol. IV.1, pp. 190-278. Leipzig: Teubner 1901-1908. - Finite 
displacements, velocity, acceleration, linkages, mechanisms. 
[2.5] STACKEL, P.: Elementare Dynamik der Punktsysteme und starren Korper. Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften, Vol. IV.1, pp. 436-684. Leipzig: Teubner 
1901 -1908. - Direct treatment of the dynamics of particles and rigid bodies, with 
bibliography and detailed historical references. Gyroscopic motion handled rather 
fully, with diagrams. 
[26] SYNGE, J.L., and B.A. GRIFFITH: Principles of Mechanics. New York-Toronto-London: 
McGraw-Hill1959 (3rd Edn.). -Textbook of statics and dynamics up to gyroscopic theory. 
Motion of charged particles in axially symmetric electromagnetic field. Methods of 
LAGRANGE and HAMILTON. Vibrations. Introduction to relativity. 
[27] Voss, A.: Die Prinzipien der ratione lien Mechanik. Encyklopadie der mathematischen 
Wissenschaften, Vol. IV.1, pp. 3-121. Leipzig: Teubner 1901-1908. - History 
and philosophy of mechanics, from GALILEO and NEWTON. Eliminati0 p. of force by 
KELVIN and HERTZ. Principles of n'ALEMBERT, FOURIER, GAUSS, HAMILTON. Principle of energy. 
[28] WHITTAKER, E. T.: A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid 
Bodies. Cambridge: University Press 1937 (4th Edn.). Reprinted by Dover Publications, New York 1944. The 2nd Edition (1917) translated into German by F. and 
K. MrTTELSTEN-ScHEID (Berlin: Springer 1924). - Standard treatise, with systematic 
arrangement of material. More compact than APPELL [2] or LEvr-CrVITA and AMALDI [16], the usual problems of the dynamics of particles and rigid bodies being treated 
by Lagrangian methods, without vector notation or diagrams. The second half of tl:e 
book deals with Hamiltonian systems, integral invariants, transformation theory, 
first integrals, three-body problem, theory of orbits. 
[29] WINKELMANN, M., and R. GRAMMEL: Kinetik der starren Korper. GEIGER-SCHEEL, 
Handbuch der Physik, Vol. V, pp. 373-483. Berlin: Springer 1927. - The top, symmetric and unsymmetric, with many diagrams. Relative motion of a rigid body on 
the rotating earth. Systems of rigid bodies. Gyroscopic stability. 
[30] WrNTNER, A.: The Analytic Foundations of Celestial Mechanics. Princeton: University 
Press 1947. -The main theme is then-body problem, but the book contains a compact 
critical treatment of Hamiltonian methods and canonical transformations, with interesting historical notes and references at the end. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/!. 15 
The Classical Field Theories. 
By 
C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN 1• 
With 4 7 Figures. 
With an Appendix on Invariants by 
j. L. ERICKSEN. 
A. The field viewpoint in classical physics. 
1. Corpuseies and fields. Today matter is universally regarded as composed 
of molecules. Though molecules cannot be discerned by human senses, they may 
be defined precisely as the smallest portions of a material to exhibit certain of 
its distinguishing properties, and much of the behavior of individual molecules 
is predicted satisfactorily by known physical laws. Molecules in their turn are 
regarded as composed of atoms; these, of nuclei and electrons; and nuclei themselves as composed of certain elementary particles. The behavior of the elementary 
particles has been reduced, so far, but to a partial subservience to theory. Whether 
these elementary particles await analysis into still smaller corpusdes remains 
for the future. 
Thus in the physics of today, corpusdes are supreme. I t might seem mandatory, 
when we are to deal with extended matter and electricity, that we begin with thelaws 
governing the elementary particles and derive from them, as mere corollaries, the 
laws governing apparently continuous bodies. Such a program is triply impractical: 
A. The laws of the elementary particles are not yet fully established. Even 
such senior disciplines as quantum mechanics and general relativity remain open 
to possible basic revision and not yet satisfactorily interconnected. 
B. The mathematical difficulties are at present insuperable. (Even on a 
lower level they remain: As is well known, the "proof" that a quantum-mechanical 
system may be replaced by a classical system in first approximation is defective.) 
C. In such special cases as have actually been treated, the mathematical 
"approximations" committed in order to get to an answer are so drastic that 
the results obtained are not fair trials of what the basic laws may imply. When 
such a result appears in disaccord with experience, we are at a loss whether to 
assign the blame to the basic laws themselves or to the mathematical process 
used in the subsequent derivations. 
1 Acknowledgment. The authors are deeply indebted to Professor Dr. K. ZOLLER for thorough 
criticism of most of the manuscript and proofs. They are grateful also to Professors J. L. ERICKSEN and W. NoLL and to Dr. B. CoLEMAN for help in certain passages. 
During portions of the period of preparation of this treatise, TRUESDELL's work was 
supported by an ONR contract {1955 to 1956) the U. S. National Science Foundation {1956), 
the John Sirnon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation (1957), the Mathematics Research 
Center, U.S. Army, University of Wisconsin (1958). and the National Bureau of Standards 
(1959). During 1957 he was on sabbaticalleave from Indiana University. 
While all parts of this work have been discussed and revised jointly, Chaps. A to E and 
the firsthalf of Chap. G were written by TRUESDELL; Chap. Fand the second half of Chap. G, 
by TouPIN. 
Sect. 1. Corpuseies and fields. 227 
But more than this, such a program even if successful would be illusory: 
(a) The future discovery of new entities within the present "elementary" 
partides would nullify any daim for such results as predictions from "basic" 
laws of physics. Indeed, within any corpuscular view the possibility of an infinite 
regress is logically inevitable. 
(b) The details of the behavior of the corpuscles are extraneous to most 
mechanical and electromagnetic problems. Materials whose corpuscular structure 
is quite different may exhibit no perceptible difference of response to stress. 
A voiding illusory complications, it is possible to construct a direct theory of 
the continuous field, indefinitely divisible without losing any of its defining 
properties. The field may be the seat of motion, matter, force, energy, and electromagnetism. Theories expressed in terms of the field concept are called phenomenological, because they represent the immediate phenomena of experience, 
not attempting to explain them in terms of corpusdes or other inferred quantities. 
The corpuscular theories and the field theories are mutually Contradietory 
as direct models of nature 1• The field is indefinitely divisible; the corpusde is 
not. To mingle the terms and concepts appropriate to these two distinct representations of nature, while unfortunately a common practice, leads to confusion if not to error. For example, to speak of an element of volume in a gas 
as "a region large enough to contain many molecules but small enough to be 
used as an element of integration" is not only loose but also needless and bootless. 
In a deeper sense, the continuous field and the assembly of corpusdes may 
be set into entire agreement. Adopting the viewpoint of statistical mechanics, 
consider a dassical system of mass-points of any kind whatever, and assign a 
probability to its initial conditions. Extending a notable success by IRVING 
and KIRKWOOD 2, NoLL3 has defined certain phase averages which he proved to 
satisfy exactly the laws of balance for a continuous field. This result, not a limit 
formula or approximation, is an exact theorem on distributions in phase space. 
Thus those who prefer to regard dassical statistical mechanics as fundamental 
may nevertheless employ the field concept as exact in terms of expected values. 
While sometimes the phenomenological approach is regarded as only approximate, the result just described shows that in representing matter as continuous 
rather than discrete we can in fact make no statement that is inconsistent with 
the statistical view of matter as composed of dassical molecules, so long as we 
confine attention to the exact and generat theory of continuous media 4• 
This treatise presents the exact and general theory of the continuous field. 
1 The formal "derivations" of the field equations from the mass-point equations of 
mechanics given in many textbooks are illusory, such a derivation being impossible without 
added assumptions which are rendered superfluous by a direct approach to the continuum. 
The difficulty can be avoided by a formulation of the fundamental equations as Stieltjes 
integrals (cf. Sect. 201); in essence, this was done by EuLER [1752, 2, §§ 20-22]. 
2 [1950, 12]. Square brackets refer to the bibliography. 
3 [1955, 19]. In NoLL's paper precise conditions of regularity for the density in phase 
are stated. The molecules, not restricted in variety, are supposed free of constraints but 
otherwise subject to arbitrary mutual and extrinsic forces. The expression for the resultant 
extrinsic force in general does not depend only on the extrinsic forces to which the molecules 
are subject; otherwise the agreement stated in the text above is unqualified. An extension 
to quantum-mechanical systems is given by IRVING and ZwANZIG [1951, 12]. 
4 That is, only the generat equations expressing the balance of mass, momentum, and 
energy in the continuous field have been derived. There is no indication that any special 
theory of continuous bodies, such as the theory of perfect fluids, is consistent with statistical 
mechanics. In fact, a simple field theory seems to emerge only in approximation, and from 
a simple molecular picture an extremely complicated field theory results. Also, the exact 
agreement does not extend to thermodynamics, which from the statistical standpoint appears 
tobe only an approximate theory. 
15* 
228 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 2, 3. 
2. Classical mass-points and classical fields. From the time of NEWTON until 
relatively recently, many natural scientists considered the mass-point the fundamental quantity of nature, or at least of mechanics. They believed that matter 
was composed of many very small particles obeying the laws of classical mechanics, 
and that, consequently, the behavior of gross matter could be predicted, in 
principle, to any desired accuracy, from a knowledge of the intermolecular forces. 
Thus continuum mechanics appears as an approximate or at best secondary 
theory within classical mechanics. While this tradition clings on in physics 
teaching today, it is not realistic. Aside from the as yet unconquered mathematical difficulties in putting this ideal program into practice, the program 
itself is out of keeping with modern views on matter. The smallest units of matter 
are no Ionger believed to obey the laws of Newtonian mechanics, except approximately and in circumstances rarely occurring in dense matter. Nevertheless, 
conditions in which the classicallaws of momentum and energy fail perceptibly 
for tangible portians of matter are extremely rare if not altogether unknown. 
To cite an example, no corpuscular theory based on Newtonian mechanics 
has produced formulae for the specific heats of solids which agree with experimental values. N evertheless, there is not the slightest indication that a solid 
body when heated and set in motion fails, as a body, to obey the classical laws 
of balance of mass, momentum, and energy. In fact it is almost the rule that 
Newtonian mechanics, while not appropriate to the corpuscles making up a body, 
agrees with experience when applied to the body as a whole, except for certain 
phenomena of astronomical scale. Only paedagogical custom has bindered general 
realization that as a physical theory, continuum mechanics is better than masspoint mechanics 1• 
Indeed, in physics it is inappropriate to lay down the laws of classical mechanics for small bodies, to which in general they do not apply, and thence to 
derive or state by analogy the corresponding laws for extended bodies, to which 
they do apply. Rather, the process should be reversed: Classical mechanics is 
the mechanics of extended bodies 2• 
There remain certain special problems, particularly problems in celestial 
mechanics, ballistics, and mechanisms, where the mechanics of mass-points is 
accurate. As is shown in Sect. 167, problems of this kind are easily and reasonably regarded as special cases within continuum mechanics. 
3. Experiments and axioms. It has become fashionable to present the foundations of theoretical physics in terms of experiments. Indeed, since physics is 
intended to predict numerous phenomena of nature from knowledge of a few, 
the preconception that a given physical discipline should be derivable from the 
results of certain basic experiments is most appealing. In fact, however, an 
experimental approach to mechanics and electromagnetism is not practical. 
The field, infinite in extent and indefinitely divisible, is by its very nature not 
measurable directly. The "experiments" sometimes used as the starting point 
for paedagogical treatments of field theories are a posteriori verifications at best; 
always unperformed and often unperformable, too often they are mere hoaxes. 
Moreover, they belie the true course by which the field theories have developed. 
Experience has been the guide, thought has been the creator 3• Not only does 
any theory reduce and abstract expericnce, but also it overreaches it by extra 
1 Cf. TRUESDELL [1952, 22, PP· 79-80]. 2 Cf. HAMEL [1908, 4, p. 351]. Note also that from a theory of phase averages over systems 
governed by quantum mechanics IRVING and ZwANZIG [1951,12] infer the classical equations 
of balance of mass, momentum, and energy. 3 Cf. e.g. DUGAS [1954, 6], TRUESDELL [1956, 23]. 
Sect. 3. Experiments and axioms. 229 
assumptions made for definiteness. Theory, in its turn, predicts the results of 
certain specific experiments. The body of theory furnishes the concepts and 
formulae by means of which experiment can be interpreted as in accord or disaccord with it. To overturn a theory by the results of experiment, we seek the 
aid of the theory itself; in terms of the theory, from experiment we may find 
agreement which develops cÖnfidence in the theory, but establish a theory by 
experiment we never can. Experiment, indeed, is a necessary adjunct to a physical theory; but it is an adjunct, not the master. 
While most theoretical physicists seem to act in accord with the above views, they rarely 
admit to holding them. Therefore a fuller explanation, largely a paraphrase of a work by 
SouTHWELL1, is appended. 
The "operational" system accepts as basic only quantities susceptible of direct measurement and, connecting them, laws which are to be tested by experiment. From these laws, 
logical inference is to derive a system shown by actual trial to keep contact with physical 
experience at every stage. 
Apart from the practicallimitations in checking any theoretical "law", there is a deeper 
objection against this view of physics, in that it rests on a circularity: No experiment can 
be interpreted without recourse to ideas in themselves part of the theory under examination. 
Similarly, no quantity can be measured in the absence of a theory explaining the experiment. 
Consider the measurement of "mass" by weighing or by impact; in the former case the law 
of falling bodies andin the latter case the law of conservation of momentum, both employing 
the concept of mass, are used to complete the measurement. If we seek to verify NEWTON's 
"law" that "Every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, 
unless compelled to change that state by forces impressed upon it," 2 we require a free body, 
unavailable because all bodies in the Iabaratory are subject to the earth's attraction. Indeed, 
we try to neutralize that attraction, as in "ATwoon's machine": The body is connected by 
a light string passing over a freely running pulley with a second body of equal weight, and 
it is found that, started with any initial velocity, the test body retains its velocity almost 
unchanged. Casting aside the small observed retardation, doubtless arising from friction, 
we still cannot accept this result as a proof of the "law" in question. The body found to 
move with substantially uniform speed and direction is not a free body, and without the 
principles of mechanics, themselves dependent upon the law we are supposedly establishing 
by experiment, we cannot justly assert that the forces present do in fact neutralize each 
other. More elaborate application of the principles of mechanics is required if we are to 
reason that the inertia of the pulley has no effect on the ideal experiment. Further, to estimate the "experimental error" in the real experiment, we require a hypothesis of friction 
and an application of the laws of mechanics both for the effect of this friction and for the 
partially counteracting effect of the inertia of the pulley. 
Such difficulties are avoided by the postulational standpoint, according to which physics, 
as an abstract discipline, may employ any variables and any consistent initial assumptions 
or "laws" which are convenient. In construction of this mathematical system it is not 
necessary to maintain contact with experiment at every stage. The system is an abstract 
model, designed to represent some of the observed phenomena of the physical universe, but 
directly concerned only with ideal bodies. Same few of the properties of theseideal bodies are 
postulated; the numerous remainder is tobe derived mathematically. Whether these derived 
properties correspond with physical observationisaseparate question, tobe decided by subsequent comparison with experiment. But the available tests apply only to the system as 
a whole: We cannot devise an experimentsuch as to verify any one of its assumptions apart 
from the rest. 
Naturally it is possible to construct an ideal system without relevance to 
physics. However, since experience is the guide, entirely wrong physical theories 
have been rare. Rather, a weil thought theory usually turnsout to have relevance 
for certain physical phenomena but to be in error for others. Such is the case 
with the classical field theories. Their failures areweil known and have provided 
the impetus for "modern" physics. Often their successes are forgotten. It 
is classical physics by which we grasp the world about us: the heavenly 
1 [1929, 9]. 
2 [1687, 1, Lex 1]. 
230 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 4. 
motions, the winds and the tides, the terrestrial spin and the subterraneous 
tremors, prime movers and mechanisms, sound and flying, heat and light!. 
Thus the classical field theories have won indisputable permanence in the language by which we speak of nature. Whatever the future revisions of theories 
of the structure of matter, the place of the class~cal field theories will remain 
unchanged. This permanence, along with the difficulties mentioned in Sect. 1, 
makes necessary a complete and independent presentation of the foundations of 
the classical field theories. Being mathematical disciplines, they should be derived 
from axioms. 
Indeed, as his sixth problern HILBERT2 set the construction of a set of axioms, 
on the model of the axioms of geometry, for "those branches of physics where 
mathematics now plays a preponderant part; first among them are probability 
theory and mechanics." Like all of his problems conceming physical applications 
of mathematics, his proposal for mechanics has received little attention. The 
possibility that the future may revise the physics of small corpusdes does not 
reduce the need for axiomatic treatment of the field theories. Physics, like 
mathematics, may be constructed precisely at several different levels. The 
interconnection of the different levels, either exactly or by approximation or by 
addition of new axioms, then fumishes definite mathematical problems 3• 
Having reached agreement that we should base the classical field theories 
on a set of axioms, we must now admit, ruefully, our inability to do so. In our 
opinion, none of the attempts to form such a system has been successful. Only 
in very recent years has an adequate set of axioms for pure mechanics, at last, 
been constructed by Non 4• To present his development of the subject here 
would be premature, since a correspondingly clear and precise formulation of 
irreversible thermodynamics is not yet available. We regard the fully invariant 
formalism for electromagnetic theory given in our Chap. F as being essentially 
an axiomatization of the subject. Non and CoLEMAN have disclosed to us the 
outline of what appears to be a satisfactory basis of general thermodynamics 
in deformable media. Thus there are grounds for expecting that HILBERT's 
program will shortly be actualized. 
Despite the lack of complete axiomatic formulation, the generat equations governing the classical fields are known and universally accepted. The present article 
is devoted to a formally precise study of these general equations. Any future 
axiomatization, if successful, will necessarily lead to these same equations. 
4. Mathematics and its physical interpretation. That a branch of theoretical 
physics is a mathematical science by no means implies its aim or interests to 
be those of pure mathematics. Rather, the Problems are set by the subject. The 
developments must illumine the physical aspects of the theory, not necessarily 
in the narrower sense of prediction of numerical results for comparison with 
experimental measurement, but rather for the grasp and picture of the theory 
in relation to experience. In this spirit do we pursue our subject, neither seeking 
nor avoiding mathematical complexity5• 
1 Cf. V. BJERKNES et al. [1933. 3, Vorwort]. 2 [1900, 5]. 3 In mathematics the economy of such independent constructions has lang been realized. 
E.g., to construct the complex numbers we presume the properties of the real numbers given; 
for the real numbers, those of the integers; and for the integers, mathematical logic. To 
approach fluids in terms of nuclear physics is like treating functions of a complex variable 
with the apparatus of formal logic. 4 [1957. 11] [1958, 8] [1959 • .9]. 
5 The expression of such a program has been attributed to KELVIN and TAIT, but we are 
unable to trace the reference. 
Sect. s. Exact and approximate theories. 231 
Some will reproach us with too much abstract and useless formalism. Not 
forgetting that such deprecation was bestowed upon WHITTAKER's Analytical 
Dynamics half a century ago, we are confident that the reader of half a century 
hence will regard our compromise of the moment as erring rather toward insufficient use of the mathematical tools available. 
Any mathematical theory of physics must idealize nature. That much of 
nature is left unrepresented in any one theory is obvious; less so, that theory 
may err in adding extra features not dictated by experience. For example, the 
infinity of space is itself a purely mathematical concept 1 , and all theories erected 
within this space must share in the geometrical idealization already implied. 
Indeed, it is difficult to find any theory that does not contain infinities, and 
infinities, by definition, are immeasurable. While at one time certain theoretical 
statements were regarded as "laws" of physics, nowadays many theorists prefer 
to regard each theory as a mathematical model 2 of some aspect of nature. 
In a sense, then, every theory is only "approximate" in respect to nature 
itself. This unavoidable defect in theory is often taken as a patent for "approximate" mathematics in the deductions from it. Indeed, while mathematics is 
generally understood to proceed by entirely logical processes, were the "derivations" in some of the accepted physical papers of today translated into common 
reasoning, they would fail to meet the logical standards of a competent historian 
or bibliographer. All too often is heard the alibi that since the theory itself is 
only approximate, the mathematics need be no better. In truth the opposite 
follows. Granted that the model represents but a part of nature, we are to find 
what such an ideal picture implies. A result strictly derived serves as a test of 
the model; a false result proves nothing but the failure of the theorist. To call 
an error by a sweeter name does not correct it. The oversimplification or extension afforded by the model is not error: The model, if well made, shows at least 
how the universe might behave, but logical errors bring us no closer to the reality 
of any universe. In physical theory, mathematical rigor is of the essence. 
In this ti-eatise we attempt to keep the argument rigorous. However, nothing 
is gained by laboring elementary details. We presume that the reader knows 
infinitesimal calculus, simple algebra, and tensor analysis; that he can supply 
for himself, without repetition on our part, conditions sufficient for interchanging differentiations, inversion of functions, expansions in power series, etc. 
Roughly speaking, our proportion of what is said to what is left unsaid is that 
which is customary in works on differential geometry. 
5. Exact and approximate theories. While every theory is a model of nature, 
and thus not "exact" in relation to it, nevertheless there is a government among 
theories. A theory is tested by experiment, and a range of confidence in it is 
established. In this sense, a given theory is "good"; if the range of application 
is greater than another's, it is the "better" of the two. For example, the theory 
of the flow of viscous compressible fluids should suffice to predict definite results, 
fit for experimental test, concerning the propagation, absorption, and dispersion 
of sound in fluids. That such results have never been obtained is only from our 
lack of sufficient mathematics. Instead, a perturbation scheme has been used to 
infer equations governing "small" motions. The resulting acoustical theory is 
presumed to yield an" approximation" to the better but intractable theory of fluids. 
Any given theory may be laid down as "exact ". It is then a definite mathematical problern to discover the relation of its results to those derived from 
1 EULER [1736, 1, § 8]. 2 HELMHOL TZ [ 1902, 4, § 1]. 
232 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 6. 7. 
other theories, considered as "approximate" in respect to it. Problems of this 
kind are important and difficult, indeed in most cases too difficult for the mathematics available today. We do not attempt to study them in this treatise. Neither 
co we presentl the unjustified linearizations or formal schemes of perturbation 
which occupy much of the literature. Our scope is restricted to exact treatment. 
6. Closed systems and armatures. In the nineteenth century there was a search 
for sets of physical laws which should include the maximum range of physical 
phenomena yet remain sufficiently specific to predict definite results in particular 
cases. The culmination of this trend came in the systems of ]AUMANN and 
LoHR 2, in which an all-embracing set of equations goveming mechanics, electrodynamics, che~ical reactions, diffusion, heat transfer, electromechanical effects, 
etc. are postulated. Current knowledge of the structure of matter (cf. Sect. 1) 
has destroyed the raison d' etre of such closed systems as weil as rendering them 
impractical. 
Rather, the classical field theories offer us armatures on which particular 
models of cxtendcd matter and electricity may be built. In this spirit, it is 
inclusiveness ratl:.er than particular problems that we seek here. For example, 
it is often claimed tlmt in nature, if we Iook closely enough, only conservative 
forces occur; that such dfects as friction are gross appearances resulting only 
from Iack of knowledge of the underlying conservative process. But natural 
problems are not confined to those on the smallest or largest scale. The world 
about us, as we see it, must be mastered and controlled. Situations incompletely 
described are the rule, not the exception, and we must formulate good theories 
for these limited aspccts of nature. Our object is a generat framework 3 for such 
theories. The most general motions, the most general stresses, the most general 
flows of energy, and the most general electromagnetic fields, fumish the subject 
of this treatise. 
7. Field equations and constitutive equations. Motion, stress, energy, entropy, 
and electromagnetism are the concepts upon which field theories are constructed. 
Certain laws of conservation or balance are laid down as relating these quantities 
in all cases. These basic principles, which are in integral form 4, in regions where 
1 An exception is Parte of Subchapter BI, which is included only so as to aid the reader 
in connecting the general theory with the results assumed in the ordinary theory of elasticity. 
B [1911, 7], [1918, 3]; [1917, 5]. 3 The field viewpoint is excellently apt to secure such generality, while to overcome the 
complications of corpuscular theories it is usual to make simplifying hypotheses which sharply 
!essen their scope. Cf. HELMHOLTZ [1902, 4, § 2]. As was remarked by LAGRANGE [1788, 
1, Part 1, Sect. IV, § II, '1[9] the field view has precisely the same mathematical advantage 
over the corpuscular view as the differential theory of curves over polygonal approximations. 4 The view that all naturallaws should be expressed by integrals is generally attributed 
to the Göttingen lectures of HILBERT. That jump conditions arenottobe derived from smooth 
solutions was clearly understood by STOKES [1848, 4, p. 353]: " ... I wish the two subjects 
to be considered as quite distinct." 
In recent years mathematicians have created various kinds of "generalized solutions ", 
whereby, granted certain purely analytic presumptions as to the intended meaning of a 
problern formulated in terms of differential equations, discontinuous solutions may be inferred from continuous ones. We regard these approaches not only as demanding unnecessary 
mathematical apparatus but also as concealing the simple and immediate nature of physical 
laws. Neither in respect torigor nor in any other regard do they offer advantages over HILBERT's program of stating physicallaws in integral form. While the work of ZEMPLEN [1905, 
7, p. 438] and HELLINGER [1914, 4], which reflects HILBERT's influence, rests upon variational 
principles, the program of postulating integral conservation laws, which we follow here, seems 
first to have been laid down by KoTTLER [1922, 3 and 4]. Cf. also CARTAN [1923. 1, introd., 
§§ 8, 81], KoTCHINE [1926, 3, § 3]. As remarked by VAN DANTZIG [1937. 11], it is obvious 
that notions like differentiability can have no empirical basis at all. Since, on the contrary, 
Sect. 8. The nature and plan of this treatise. 233 
the variables change sufficiently smoothly are equivalent to differential field 
equations; at surfaces of discontinuity, to fump conditions. 
The field equations and jump conditions form an underdetermined system, 
insufficient to yield specific answers unless further equations are supplied. Within 
the embracing concept of the balanced fields, it is possible to define ideal materials 1 
by certain further conditions. These defining conditions are called constitutive 
equations. The most familiar constitutive equations, here expressed in words, are: 
The distances between particles do not change (Rigid body). 
The stress is hydrostatic ( Perfeet fluid). 
The stress may be determined from the stretching alone (Viscous fluid, perfectly plastic body). 
The stress may be determined from the strain alone (Perfectly elastic body). 
The flux of energy is a linear function of the temperature gradient (Classical 
linear heat conduction). 
The thermodynamic affinities are linear functions of the thermodynamic 
fluxes ("Irreversible thermodynamics "). 
The diffusion velocity of a constituent of a binary mixture is proportional 
to the gradient of its peculiar density (Classicallinear mass diffusion). 
The electric displacement is proportional to the electric field; the magnetic 
induction is proportional to the magnetic intensity (Classical linear electromagnetism). 
The constitutive equations and field equations together, along with the jump 
conditions and boundary conditions, should lead to a definite theory, predicting 
specific answers to particular problems. For some of the special materials listed 
above, this definiteness has been proved through theorems of existence and 
uniqueness. 
The present treatise is devoted to the generat principles of balance alone. Thus 
we deal only with the field equations and fump conditions. Our last chapter 
mentions guiding principles by which rational constitutive equations may be 
formulated. The theories of certain particular ideal materials fill several later 
volumes of the Encyclopedia. 
8. The nature and plan of this treatise. We present the common foundation 
of the field viewpoint 2 • We aim to provide the reader with a full panoply of 
touls of research, whereby he himself, put into possession not only of the latest 
discoveries but also of the profound but all too often forgotten achievements of 
previous generations, may set to work as a theorist. 
This treatise is intended for the specialist, not the beginner. Necessarily it 
presents the foundations of the field theories, not as they appeared in the last 
century and linger on in the textbooks, nor as the experts in some other domains 
such simple theories as the dynamics of perfect fluids and linear electromagnetism are known 
to furnish inadequate models of experience when the fields appearing are required tobe everywhere continuous, no physical principle should be stated in differential form. 
The older approach, still followed in many textbooks, either sets up more special postulates 
for discontinuities or employs an unrigorous Iimit process from the differentiable case. 
1 The program of mechanics was laid out by EuLER [17 52, 2, § 19] (cf. also his remarks 
on rigid bodies and ideal fluids [1769, 1, § 12]); of continuum mechanics in particular, by 
CAUCHY [1823, 1], but the later emphasis on linear problems in very special theories caused 
it tobe largely forgotten until it was stated anew by v. MrsEs [1930, 3]. 
2 The only single work attempting even a major part of our subject is the book of BRILL 
[1909, 2]. 
234 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 9. 
may think they ought tobe presented 1, but as they are cultivated by the specialists 
of today. 
This treatise is organized as follows: 
1. Kinematics, including conservation of mass, in Chaps. B and C. 
2. Balance of momentum, Chap. D. 
3. Balance of energy, including the thermodynamics of irreversible deformations, 
Chap. E. 
4. Balance of electromagnetism, Chap. F. 
5. Guiding principles for constitutive equations and examples of them, Chap. G. 
Foramore detailed plan, see the table of contents. 
We interpret "classical" in the narrower sense, as confined to phenomena in 
Euclidean three-dimensional space 2 and governed by N ewtonian mechanical 
principles. However, it would be crippling to maintain this restriction in dealing 
with electromagnetism. The four-dimensional viewpoint adopted in Chap. F 
necessitates further kinematical developments there and results in some duplication of subject. On the other band, to have begun with a world-invariant 
formalism in the earlier chapters would have greatly lessened their direct usefulness to specialists in mechanics. 
That over one half of the work is devoted to kinematics, the mathematical 
description of motion, is not malapropos. As the need for more and more general 
field theories has grown, the preliminary light which kinematics unencumbered 
by physical restrictions can provide, always appreciated by virtuosi of mechanics3, has become a necessity. In presenting here as our Chaps. Band C the 
first general treatise on the kinematics of continua, we believe that we look toward 
the future course of the field theories. 
9. Tradition. We have tried to supply full and correct attributions, not only 
for historical perspective but also in plain justice. If the name attached to many 
a proposition is but a small one, that is all the less reason that its owner should 
be pilled of what little he wrought by a no greater name of today, whose slight 
capacities are scarcely increased by wilful or heedless ignorance of what others 
have done. However, the multitude of detailed citations should not prevent 
the great names from emerging. Our subject is largely the creation of EULER 
and CAUCHY. If we present their results in forms often very different from the 
original, in return we have included many of their discoveries that have not 
previously found a place in expositions. Not only will these names be the most 
frequently encountered, but also their appearances are at the crucial theorems 
and definitions. Next come STOKES, HELMHOLTZ, KrRCHHOFF, KELVIN, 
MAXWELL and HUGONIOT. In the twentieth century, HADAMARD and HILBERT 4 
continued and deepened the tradition. That no one later name is frequently 
cited does not indicate that the subject is dead. Rather, after a generation of 
1 Cf. KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, Preface]: " ... where we may appear to have rashly 
and needlessly interfered with methods and systems of proof in the present day generally 
accepted, we take the position of Restorers, not of Innovators." 2 At the end of the treatise, references to relativistic and to non-Euclidean or higherdimensional but non-relativistic theories are given in Special Bibliographies R and N, respectively. 3 We follow the tradition of EuLER, CAUCHY, and KELVIN. Cf. the remarks of HELMHOATZ [1858, 1, lntrod.J, ZHUKOVSKI [1876, 7], ST. VENANT [1880, 10] and jAUMANN [1905, 
2, Introd.]. 
4 While HILBERT published nothing relevant to our subject, his personal influence was 
widespread and continuing (cf. e.g. ZEMPLEN [1905, 7], HELLINGER [1914, 4, footnote 6]), 
and the organization used in his Göttingen lectures [1907, 3 and 4] has influenced ours. 
Cf. also footnote 4, p. 232. 
Sect. 10. General scheme of notation. 235 
quiescence, in very recent years it has experienced a revival in a form more compact 
and general, and, we believe, closer to nature. 
10. General scheme of notation. We make frequent and essential use of 
notations and results given in the appendix, "Invariants ", by J. L. ERICKSEN. 
Citations of that article are indicated by the prefix App. Thus "(App. 7.1)" 
refers to Eq. (7.1) ofthat appendix, and "Sect. App. 7" refers to its Sect. 7. 
The following partial table explains the basis for selection of notations. It 
has not been possible to maintain this scheme without exception, nor to avoid 
use of the same symbols in different senses in widely separate passages. 
Full-sized characters: 
I talic letters A, a, ... , etc.: Sealars and the kernel indices of vectors and 
tensors. For distinctions, see Sects. App. 15, 14. 
Bald-face letters A, a, ~ ... : Vectors, tensors, and matrices. For explanation, see 
Sect. App. 3. 
Roman numerals I, II, III, II, III, etc.: Principal invariants and moments 
of second order tensors (Sect. App. 38). 
H ebrew letters ~. ~ •... : Scalar coefficients in expressions for isotropic functions (Sect. 299). 
Russian capitals .IJ., U .... : Other special scalar invariants. 
Script letters d, .a, ... : Regions, surfaces and curves. 
German letters ~. a, ... , W, a, ... : Quantities defined by integrals. 
Black-letter capitals ~. W, ... : Similarity parameters. 
Sans-serif capitals M, U, ... , M, U, ... : Dimensional units and dimensions 
(Sect. App. 7). 
Creek letters e, {}, tP, ff!, ... : Angles, thermodynamic variables, world tensors. 
Indices: 
Italic and Creekindices K, k, T, y, ... : Tensorial indices. 
Roman indices s, t, ... , S, T, ... : Descriptive marks. 
Bald-face indices: Tensors or matrices from which an invariant is constructed. 
For example, Ia, IIa, and IIIa are the principal invariants of a. 
German indices a, ~ •... : Enumerative indices, not indicating tensor character. 
The corresponding numbers are written in italics. Thu" b! and c~ stand for the 
sets of contravariant and covariant components of the vectors b 1 , b 2 , ... , b1 
and c1, c2, .•. , c1. 
A 
A,Ak 
A,Ak 
Symbol 
a, ayß• A, ArA 
b, by 6 • B, BrA 
B,Bk 
c 
c, Ckm 
C,CKM 
List of frequently used symbols 
Name 
Abnormality of a vector field 
Axis of finite rotation 
Magnetic potential 
First fundamental form of a surface 
Second fundamental form of a surface 
Magnetic flux density 
Position vector of the center of mass 
CAUCHY's deformation tensor 
GREEN's deformation tensor 
Velocity of light in the aether 
Absolute concentration of the constituent ~ 
Mass supply of the constituent ~ 
Place of definition 
or first occurrence 
(App. 30.1) 
(37.17) 
Sect. 276 
(App. 19.7) 
(App. 21.5) 
Sect. 274 
(161.5) 
(26.1) 
(26.2) 
Sect. 280 
(158.4) 
(159.1) 
236 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
d(n) 
da 
d,d,.". 
Symbol 
da, d~, da, 
Da, D~, na, etc. 
D,Dk 
ek,k, ... k,.• ek,k, ... k,. 
e, e11 "., E, EKM 
e, 6,."., E, 'EKM 
E,E11 
f, 111 
Fk".p, pabp, etc. 
g 
g, Ckm g", gf 
g,grA 
h, hk 
H,H11 
i, ik, i[W] 
f, 1 
J,]k 
l, l,., lkm 
m(n) 
m, mkqp 
M,M11 
n 
p, pk,P, PK 
.P(=oi:) 
ii(=~l 
p 
p 
P<J!.Pt 
p 
P,Pk 
Q 
R, R"K· R11"., etc. R",. ... p. ß(G) 
il, R.KM· f, r,."., iiK 
s, s [W] 
t 
t 
t, tr 
t(n)' ttn) 
t, tkm 
T, TkM, TKM, etc. 
TrA 
Un 
u,ur 
Name 
Stretching in the direction of n 
Principal stretching 
EuLER's stretching tensor 
} Directors and reciprocal directors of an oriented body 
Charge potential 
Absolute scalar permutation symbols 
Strain tensors 
Elongation tensors 
Electric field 
Assigned force field 
Relative wryness of a strained oriented body 
Determinant of metric tensor 
Metric tensor 
Euclidean shifter 
World space metric 
Flux of energy 
Current potential 
lnflux of W 
Sealars defined by Jacobians 
Current density 
Assigned couple field 
Couple-stress vector 
Couple-stress tensor 
Magnetization field 
Unit normal to a surface, principal normal of a curve, 
etc. 
Position vector 
Velocity field 
Aceeieration field 
Total pressure in the hydrostatic special case 
Mean pressure 
Supply of momentum for the constituent 2l 
Stress power 
Polarization density 
Charge density 
Finite rotation tensor 
Riemann tensor based on a 
Tensors and vectors of mean rotation 
Supply of W 
Time 
Unit tangent vector 
World covariant space normal 
Stress vector 
CAUCHY's stress tensor 
Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensors 
World stress-momentum tensor 
Speed of displacement of a surface 
Tangential velocity of parametrization of a surface 
Sect. 10. 
Place of definition or first occurrence 
(82.5) 
Sect. 83 
(82.2) 
(61.1) 
Sect. 276 
(App. 2.3) 
(31.1) 
(31.6) 
Sect. 274 
(200.1) 
(61.14) 
Sect. App. 2 
Sect. App. 2 
(App. 16.4) 
Sect. 152 
(241.1) 
Sect. 276 
(157.1) 
(16.5), (16.6) 
Sect. 274 
(200.3) 
(200.3) 
(203.5) 
Sect. 283 
(19.2) 
(67.2) 
(98.1) 
(204.2) 
(204.7) 
(215.2) 
(217.42) 
Sect. 283 
Sect. 274 
(37-1) 
(34.2) 
(31.6), (36.12) 
(157.1) 
(65.1) 
Sect. 152 
(200.1) 
(203.4) 
(21ü.4), (210.9) 
(211.3) 
(74.4), (1 77-5) 
(177.11) 
Sect. 10. 
Symbol 
UN 
u 
V 
V 
v• 
W,Wkm 
w,wk 
w•,w:m 
w•. W..*p 
W, WKMP• 
W«()p, etc. 
:E, xk, xl' 
X,XK 
X~K=z"K=ox"JoXK, 
x~,.=X~= axKjax" 
:il,i" 
fi,x" 
x91 
~ur~ X~ 
z, zk, z,. 
Z,ZK 
k~ 
{~p} 
I:E/XI, izJZI 
d:E, dxk, dX, dXK 
da, da,., dakm, 
dA, etc. 
dv, dV 
A, [A] 
L, [L] 
M, [M] 
Q, [0] 
r. [n 
@, [9] 
Cl>, [cp] 
2{ 
~.~" 
~ 
(t, (tlGl, ~km 
(t, ~k 
tl. g:,. 
.(), _()[Gl, .\),., .\),. m 
.() . .\),. 
l,Jlfll,~km 
3.3" 
~ 
ß, ßlGl, 2,., 2km 
W1 
'· \13,. 
Special notations. 
Name 
Speed of propagation of a surface 
Local speed of propagation of a surface 
Velocity potential 
Electric potential 
Acceleration potential 
CAUCHY's spin tensor 
Vorticity vector 
Spatial diffusion vector or tensor 
Material diffusion tensor 
} Wryness of an oriented body 
General co-ordinates of places or events 
General symbols for particles 
} Deformation gradients 
Velocity field 
Aceeieration field 
Partide of the constituent 2l 
Velocity of the constituent 2l 
Reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate of places 
Reetangular Cartesian initial co-ordinates of particles 
Physical components of stress 
Christofiel symbols 
Jacobians 
Elements of arc 
} Elements of area 
Elements of volume 
Unit and dimension of action 
Unit and dimension of length 
Unit and dimension of mass 
Unit and dimension of charge 
U nit and dimension of time 
Unit and dimension of temperature 
Unit and dimension of magnetic flux 
Virtual work 
Potential of free charge 
Total internal energy 
EuLER's tensor 
Electromotive intensity 
Totalforce 
Total moment of momentum 
Potential of free current 
Tensor of inertia 
Conduction current 
Kinetic energy 
Total torque 
Mass 
Totallinear momentum 
237 
Place of definition or first occurrence 
(183.1) 
(183.4} 
(88.2) 
Sect. 276 
(109.1) 
(86.1) 
(86.2) 
(101.5) 
(101.12) 
(61.7) 
(14.1). (152.5) 
(14.1) 
(17.1) 
(67-2) 
(98.1) 
(158.1) 
(158.2} 
(13.1) 
(13.1) 
(204.1) 
(16.1) 
(20.3) 
(20.5). (20.8) 
(20.9) 
Sect. 288 
Sect. App. 8 
Sect. 155 
Sect. 270 
Sect. 65 
(246.2) 
Sect. 270 
(232.1) 
Sect. 283 
(240.1) 
(168.4) 
Sect. 274 
(196.1) 
(166.2) 
Sect. 283 
(168.4} 
Sect. 274 
(94.1), (166.4) 
(196.1) 
(155.1) 
(166.1) 
238 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
0 
~ 
~(K) 
'WK 
9k 
d.9",. 
d#,; 
"· rxr rxa 
Pa 
Symbol 
'i' 
'i'(N,M)•'i'(n,.n) 
r. 'i'ro 
r. r!:,p. rJ.jp. ~s 
ß(N)• ß(n) 
ßa 
ß:O 
LI 
Lf,LJF<l) 
e 
B'l( 
B~( 
e(N)• B(n) 
Bo 
c 
'1J 
'TJ'l( 
'1/.'TJr"j 
H 
(J 
{} 
"" "'" Ä(N)•Ä(n) 
Äa 
Ä..a. Äua 
l''ll 
l'o 
tlab 
"o 
~ab 
n 
n,nr"j 
111a 
(! 
l! 
evr 
ll, aD 
T, Ta 
Name 
Rate of non-mechanical working 
Rate of mechanical working 
K-th moment of vorticity 
Kinematical vorticity number 
Griented k-dimensional hypersurface 
Differential element of k-dimensional hypersurface 
Dual of d9k 
Electromagnetic potential 
Thermodynamic coefficient 
Thermodynamic coefficient 
Ratio of specific heats 
Shear 
Lorentz-Minkowski metric 
Affine connections 
Extension 
Principal extension 
Kronecker symbol 
Supply of entropy 
World tensor of stretching 
Specific internal energy 
Specific internal energy of the constituent ~ 
Supply of energy for the constituent ~ 
Elongation 
Fundamental electromagnetic constant 
Specific free enthalpy (Gibbs function) 
Specific entropy 
Specific entropy of the constituent ~ 
Charge-current potential 
Total entropy 
Temperature 
Angle of finite rotation 
Specific heat at constant substate 
Specific heat at constant tensions 
Stretch 
Principal stretch 
Latent heats 
Chemical potential 
Fundamental electromagnetic constant 
Thermodynamic coefficient 
4-vector normal to surface 
Thermodynamic coefficient 
Thermodynamic pressure 
World density of polarization-magnetization 
Thermodynamic coefficient 
Mass density 
Mass density in a reference configuration 
Mass density of the constituent ~ 
Charge-current field 
Thermodynamic tension 
Sect. 10. 
Place of definition 
or first occurrence 
(240.1) 
(240.1) 
(118.1) 
(91.1) 
Sect. 268 
Sect. 268 
Sect. 268 
Sect. 271 
(248.5) 
(248.5) 
(249.7) 
(25.11) 
Sect. 280 
(25.2) 
Sect. 27 
(257.3) 
(153.10) 
(241.2) 
Sect. 243 
(243.3) 
(25.9) 
Sect. 279 
(251.1) 
(246.1) 
(254.1) 
Sect. 271 
(257.1) 
(247.1) 
(35.1) 
(249.4) 
(249.6) 
(25.1) 
(27.3) 
(250.2) 
(255.1) 
Sect. 279 
(248.5) 
Sect. 277 
(248.5) 
Sect. 247 
Sect. 283 
(247-9) 
(155-4) 
Sect. 210 
(158.3) 
(270.1) 
(247 1) 
Sect. 11. 
Symbol 
V 
v. vr 
V, Va 
r,rnr 
<!>ab 
q;, (/JrtJ 
'P 
X 
W,Wkm 
n,ntJs 
1 
w 
[W] 
Hl-
~ 
dr 
dt 
dc 
dt 
~d 
Tt 
curl 
div 
dual 
rot 
Guide through this treatise. 
Name 
Specific volume 
Absolute world velocity vector 
Thermodynamic substate 
World potential of free charge-current 
Thermodynamic coefficient 
Electromagnetic field 
Specific free energy 
Specific enthalpy 
Angular velocity of a frame or rigid motion 
"\Vorld vorticity tensor 
Unit tensor or matrix 
"Trident", i.e., arbitrary scalar, vector, or tensor 
J ump of W across a surface 
Impulse of W at an instant 
Material derivative of W 
Co-rotational time flux 
Convected time flux 
Displacement derivative 
Curl of a k-vector 
Natural divergence (In earlier sections, "div" and 
"curl" are applied only to three-dimensional vectors) 
Dual of a k-vector 
Naturalrotation of a k-vector 
239 
Place of definition or first occurrence 
(156.3) 
(153.3) 
(246.1) 
Sect. 283 
(247.9) 
Sect. 270 
(251.1) 
(251.1) 
(143.2), (143.14) 
(154.5) 
Sect. App. 3 
(173.1) 
( 194.13) 
(72.2) 
(148.7) 
(150.5) 
(179.5) 
Sect. 268 
Sect. 268 
Sect. 267 
Sect. 268 
11. Guide through this treatise. The chapters, and often even major subdivisions of the chapters, are largely independent of each other. We have tried 
to organize the ideas in such a way as to minimize cross-referencing. In most 
cases a reader with some experience in the subject will be able to start at any 
point he pleases. 
Chap. B collects and organizes all the researches we have been able to find 
on the kinematics of continuous media. Because of its completeness, it contains 
much dassie material found also in other works, but" some parts of it deserve 
particular notice. 
Subchapter I of Chap. B concerns the theory of a single deformation; that 
is, of finite strain and local rotation. Part f, concerning oriented bodies, presents 
apparatus for a type of physical theory as yet little studied but likely to be of 
future value. Subchapter II, which can be followed without reading its predecessor, is a treatise on the kinematics of continuous motions, i.e., deformations 
changing with time. Part e of this subchapter is directed especially toward 
interpretations in the flow of fluids and should be omitted by readers interested 
primarily in new theories; the essentials are given in the preceding parts. Part g, 
concerning relative motion, is conceptually the most important in the chapter 
and most apt to be enlightening in new studies of material behavior. Subchapter III concerns mass and momentum and includes general formulae of 
transformation under change of frame and also general solutions of the equation 
of continuity by means of stream functions of various kinds. 
240 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 12. 
Chap. C contains the kinematical theory of slip surfaces, shock waves, and 
other kinds of surfaces of discontinuity. A general equation of balance, or "conservation law", was stated in Sect. 157 and was shown tobe equivalent to a 
certain differential equation in regions of sufficient smoothness; · at the end of 
Chap. C, this same equation of balance is applied to a surface of discontinuity 
and shown to be equivalent to a certain jump condition. Thus all the laws of 
classical physics may be derived by a uniform process from appropriate integral 
equations of balance. 
Chap. D presents the laws of classical mechanics and the general theory of 
contact forces or stress, in terms of which mechanical theories of continuous 
media are formulated. Subchapter III gives many theorems on mean values of 
the stress as determined from boundary conditions when the stresses themselves 
are not uniquely determined. Subchapter IV is intended to be an exhaustive 
treatise on solutions of the equations of motion or equilibrium of a general continuum by means of stress functions. Subchapter V derives all the variational 
principles of mechanics that partake of any considerable generality. 
The first part of Chap. E presents the general theory of energy in unexceptionable terms. The rest of the chapter concerns the more dubious subject of 
thermodynamics, set within field concepts. Entropy is taken as the primitive 
idea here, and emphasis is put upon exact formal properties of equations of 
state involving arbitrarily many variables. The rate of production of entropy is 
calculated. 
A general theory of the motion of heterogeneaus media may be collected from 
Sects. 158, 159, 215, 254, 255, 259, and 261 (cf. also Sect. 295). 
Chap. F, on electromagnetism, begins by a study of a tour-dimensional spacetime in which no geometrical structure is presumed. In such a space-time the 
basic laws of conservation of charge and conservation of magnetic flux are 
then stated. These laws turn out to have an entirely general form, applicable 
alike in classical electromagnetism and in relativistic theories. A generallaw 
of conservation of energy-momentum, including as a special case the classical 
momentum principle developed in Chap. D, is formulated. Additional assumptions that characterize classical or relativistic electromagnetism are then analyzed. 
Chap. G concerns constitutive equations defining particular materials. In 
contrast to the exhaustive earlier chapters, this one is selective. After a list of 
the principles used in forming constitutive equations, there follow brief sections 
on several classical or recent theories. These sections illustrate both the theoretical 
principles governing choit;e of constitutive equations and the immediate applicability of some of the general theory given in the preceding chapters. 
B. Motion and mass. 
12. Scope and plan of the chapter. This chapter presents the kinematics of 
continuous media in a Euclidean space of three dimensions. We treat those aspects which are fundamental, either for intuitive grasp or for solution of problems 
in the various field theories. We omit the older type of kinematical research, 
where motions preserving the similarity of certain classes of geometrical figures 
are analyzed; this work is the subject of special Bibliography K at the end of 
the treatise. 
As to be expected of a general treatise on the kinematics of continua, this one 
is divided into three parts: Subchapter I presents the analysis of a single deformation, or strain; Subchapter II, of motion, which consists in a family of deformations continuously varying in time; Subchapter III, of mass. 
Sects. 13, 14. General co-ordinates. Invariant description. Duality. 241 
The general theory is due primarily to EuLER (1745-1766) and CAUCHY 
(1823-1841); important special concepts and results were added by D'ALEMBERT (1749), GREEN (1839), STOKES (1845), HELMHOLTZ (1858), KELVIN (1849-
1869), E. and F. CosSERAT (1909), ZoRAWSKI (1911), and many others. 
While many expositians of the subject have been published, no other single 
work presents even a major part of the topics in this chapter1. 
I. Deformation. 
a) Deformation gradients. 
13. Geometrical axiom. The proper content of this subchapter begins at 
Sect. 15, the function of the first two sections being only to present some geometrical preliminaries. 
Henceforth, except when the contrary is explicitly stated, we refer to Euclidean 
three-dimensional space, and we employ only real co-ordinates. Many of the 
results that follow hold in fact in Riemannian or even affine n-space and in 
complex co-ordinate systems; these generalizations will be obvious to those 
expert in geometry. 
An exact and straighttorward embodiment of the assertion that space is 
Euclidean is the existence of a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system2, to which 
all points may be referred. One such system, called the common frame, is laid 
down at the beginning, other systems of reference being defined later in terms 
of it. When co-ordinates in the common frame are to be written out, instead of 
using ZK and zk we generally write 
Z=iX+jY+kZ, z=ix+jy+kz, (13.1) 
where i, j, k are unit co-ordinate vectors in the common frame. 
While any one of the infinitely many possible reetangular Cartesian systems 
may be selected as "the" common frame, the choice is made once and for all. 
Thus, for example, we shall not use the notation ( 13.1) unless both points are 
referred to the same reetangular Cartesian system. 
14. General co-ordinates. Invariant description. Duality. In Euclidean space 
it is permissible to restriet all considerations to reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, 
to use absolute notations which eschew Co-ordinate systems, or to employ preferred curvilinear nets. Any of these three styles suffices for proving general theorems; each shows peculiar advantages in certain special problems; and each has 
its passionate and exclusive devotees. We prefer to use two independently selected 
generat curvilinear co-ordinate systems 3, one at Z and the other at z. To help 
1 Surveys of certain parts are included in the following works, of which those distinguished by an asterisk possess the merit of originality, at least in part: KELVIN and TAIT* 
[1867, 3], ZHUKOVSKI* [1876, 7], E. and F.CossERAT* [1896, I] [1909, 5], JAUMANN [1905, 2], 
LovE* [1906, 5, Appendix to Chap. I], CAFIERO [1906, I], HEuN [1913, 4], ARIANO 
[1924, I] [1925, I] [1928, I], L. BRILLOUIN [1925, 2] [1938, 2, Chap. X], PLATRIER [1936, 8], 
SJGNORINI [1943, 6], ToNOLO [1943, 8], NovozHrLov* [1948, 18], GREEN and ZERNA [1950, IO] 
[1954, 7, Chap. II], MURNAGHAN [1951, 18], TRUESDELL* [1952, 2IJ [1953, 32] [1954, 24], 
Mrsrcu [1953. I9], DEFRISE* [1953, 8], NoLL [1955. I8, Chap. 1], DovLE and ERICKSEN 
[1956, 5]. . 
2 We remind the reader of the notations explained in Sects. App. 2 and App. 3. 
3 This scheme was introduced by E. and F. CossERAT [1896, I, Chap. IV], put into 
tensorial form by MURNAGHAN [1937, 7, § 1], and deve!oped by TRUESDELL [1952, 2I, 
§§ 12-22] [1953, 32], DoYLE and ERICKSEN [1956, 5, § 111], and TOUPIN [1956, 20, § 3]. 
GmBs [1875, I, p. 185] in using two reetangular Cartesian systems noted that "It is not 
necessary, nor always convenient, to regard these systems of axes as identical ... ". 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 16 
242 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 14. 
the reader find his way through the literature, we summarize some other schemes 
in Sect. 66B. Our formalism of course includes the special case when all points 
are referred to the common frame. Thus any reader unfamiliar wi th tensor 
analysis may follow most of the development by interpreting covariant derivatives simply as partial derivatives in a single reetangular system 1 . 
Let Z and z be points, and in the neighborhood of each let general curvilinear co-ordinates X and x be given by their equations of transformation from 
the common frame, as follows (Fig. 1): 
X =X(Z), Z =Z(X); x = x (z) , z = z (x) . ( 14.1) 
Since the choices of co-ordinates employed at X and x should be entirely 
free and independent, the theory should be invariant under general changes of 
co-ordinates, X*= X* (X) and x* = x* (x). (14.2) 
This suggests use of the double tensors 2 
defined in Sect. App. 15, with the interpretation y given there. 
Throughout this subchapter, we 
shall describe conditions at x and X in 
symmetrical formalism, invariant with 
respect to choice of co-ordinates. Majuscule letters, in general, will refer 
to X; minuscules, to x. Often weshall 
give a particular procedure for constructFig.L Independentgeneral curvilinear co-ordinates. ing quantities T~:::lJf~:::P' in terms of 
information at two arbitrary points X 
and x. Now suppose we interchange the roles of X and x systematically but 
otherwise follow the same procedure. We thus obtain dual quantities t";;::.f,~:::lrJ,. 
Our symmetrical notation achieves the economy expressed in the following, 
purely formal, principle of duality 3 : In any given equation, mafuscules and 
minuscules may be interchanged. In applying this rule, the interchange must be 
effected both in the kernel letters and in the indices. Henceforth, except in the 
most important cases, we shall not write down the duals. Also, for special reasons 
we shalllater introduce special notations departing from the principle of duality, 
the most important of these being u, E, and R. 
For an easy example, consider the following prescription: Let P be the position vector 
from a fixed point to X. The dual prescription is: Let p be the position vector from a fixed 
point to :r. The resulting components pk obviously have no general relation to the components pk= gkPK of P shifted to :r. Similarly, if certain fields T, a, and A have been shown 
to satisfy the identity ykK= ak A K, then dual definitions willlead to the identity tK k= AK ak· 
The components tK k of the double field t, in general, will bear no relation to the corresponding 
converted components ofT; that is, yKk=g~gfJ{TmM=l= tKk· 
The line elements at X and x will be written 
( 14.3) 
1 Once and for all, however, we warn such a reader that deformation is a general point 
Iransformation (Sect. 15). Thus, willy nilly, he is employing the idea of general Co-ordinates, 
for this idea is inherent in the theory of deformation. 2 MICHAL [1947, 9, Chap. XIV] was the first author to apply them to the theory of deformation. No earlier work was expressed in fully invariant form. 3 In essence this principle was certainly known to CAUCHY and was used by FINGER 
[1892, 4]. The nearest we have found to a formal statement is a remark of LE Roux [1911, 9]. 
ects. 15, 16. Continuity. 243 
where G and gare given in terms of the transformations (14.1) from the common 
frame to the arbitrarily selected co-ordinate systems by the usual formulae: 
G _ _ {) azP azo 
KM- gKM- 'PQ oXK oXM ' (14.4) 
The Riemann tensors RKMPQ and rkmpq based upon the components GKM and 
gkm vanish identically. Since X and ~ are points in the same space, it is obvious 
that the components gkm and GKM are components of the same metric tensor. 
That is, if G is the dual of g, then GKM = ~M = gi. gli{ gkm and Gkm = gkm• as 
is proved formally in Sect. App. 15. We are thus justified in avoiding the kernel 
index G entirely, as usually we will, but in some cases it helps to avoid ambiguity 
if we write G11 , G12 , etc. for the covariant components of the metric tensor in 
the co-ordinates at X; 
15. Deformation. This subchapter constructs the mathematical apparatus 
describing the deformation of a portion of matter from one configuration into 
another (Fig. 2). Let a typical 
point Z be carried into z: 
Z=z(Z}, Z=Z(z). (15.1) 
In explicit notation, ( 15.1) reads 1 
x = f(X, Y, Z), etc.,} (15.2) X= F(x, y, z), etc. 
This transformationwill be called 
the deformation. Our object in this 
subchapter is to analyse the major 
properties of the deformation. 
0 ------ . 
)(' 
Fig. 2. Defonnation. 
With quantities associated with Z we shall by precise definitions set into correspondence certain quantities associated with z, saying then that these quantities 
are deformed by (15.1). 
As Z runs over a set of points fJt, its image z under the mapping (15.1) runs 
over a set of points, say i. In physical contexts the deformation of 91 into ~ 
will be produced by applying forces to the material. To promote physical 
interpretation we shall sometimes speak of fJt and i as the undeformed and the 
deformed material, respectively. More often, however, weshall prefer a symmetrical nomenclature for a mathematically symmetrical situation and shall speak 
accordingly of the material about Z and the material about z. 
16. Continuity. We now lay down the a~iom of continuity: Throughout fJt 
and i, the deformation (15.1h and its inverse (15.1) 2 are single-valued and as many 
times continuously dilferentiable as required. Not only does this axiom cast aside 
deformations so irregular as to be useless in physics, but also it implies as a 
special case the permanence of matter: No region of positive finite volume is 
deformed into one of zero or infinite volume. For this permanence it is necessary 
that the Jacobians of (15.1) do not vanish; weshall not lose essential generality 
by assuming 
oo > izJZI > o. (16.1) 
1 This is the notation of EuLER [1762, 1] [1770, 1, § 100]. The now more common notation 
a, b, c for X, Y, Z in this connection was introduced by LAGRANGE [1788, 1, Part II, Sect. II, 
~ 4]. 
16* 
244 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 16. 
It follows also that ( 15.1) carries every region into a region, every surface into 
a surface, every curve into a curve. Another corollary of the axiom of continuity 
is the principle of impenetrability 1 : One portion of matter never penetrates 
within another. 
But in addition, the assumption of continuity excludes many singularities 
of physical interest. Such exclusion is legitimate because in the physical problems 
of the classical field theories singularities are confined to points, lines, or surfaces 
over an interval of time, or to instants: In a word, they are isolated. Thus they 
may be given special attention. Generally they fall under one of two types: 
boundary surfaces or wave surfaces whose specification is included at least in 
part in the definition of the problem, and singular points engendered by the 
differential equations of the particular material. The theory of the latter is outside the scope of the present treatise, which describes only general features 
common to all materials; the form er are analysed in Chap. C. The assumption 
of continuity restricts the results of the present chapter to regions where phenomena are occurring smoothly. In any particular application, this assumption 
will generally be valid only in portions of the entire space under consideration. 
For most of the theorems which follow, it is enough that the deformation 
possess two continuous derivatives; the reader whose taste favors weakening 
hypotheses of smoothness may easily satisfy it, though not sufficiently to include in the results of this chapter the essentially different discontinuous 
motions analysed in Chap. C. 
We now generalize the terms and assumptions used in Sect. 15 and hitherto 
in this section so as to allow use of the general co-ordinate systems introduced 
in Sect. 14. We refer to X and x as co-ordinates in the undeformed and deformed 
material, respectively. From (15.1) 1 and (14.1) 2 we have x =x(z(Z(Xl)), or, 
for short, 
in co-ordinate form, 
x = x(X), X =X(x); 
xk = jk (XI, X2, xa), 
XK = FK (Xl, X2, X3)' 
k = 1, 2, 3; } 
K=1,2,3. 
( 16.2) 
( 16-3) 
We employ only co-ordinate systems such that in the axiom of continuity we 
may replace z by x and Z by X. In particular, 
oo> Jx/XJ >0. ( 16.4) 
Of frequent use is the absolute scalar I whose numerical value is the Jacobian I z/ZI: 
By ( 16.4) follows 
I-- jdet gk~ I xfXI = Jz/ZJ. 
Vdet gKM 
(16.5) 
ü<I<oo. (16.6) 
Writing j for the dual of ], we have fJ" = 1. 
The bare Eqs. (16.2) and (14.2) are of the same form, but now we bring in 
the essential distinction wanted for the interpretation we have already given 
them: The Euclidean metric is invariant under the co-ordinate transformations 
(14.2) but may be deformed arbitrarily by (16.2). Thus the co-ordinates X and X* 
are but different means of identifying the same point Z in the undeformed ma1 This principle was emphasized in the earliest researches on deformable bodies, but the 
much strenger axiom of continuity is needed in order to derive most of the concrete results 
commonly used. 
Sect. 17. Deformation gradients. 245 
terial; the co-ordinates ;r and ;r* but different names for the same point z in 
the deformed material. Two points X 1 and X 2 in the undeformed material are 
deformed by (16.2) into two points ;r1 =;r(X1) and ;r2 =;r(X2) whose distance 
from one another is in general different from the distance between xl and x2. 
The co-ordinate invariance of ( 14.3), invariance wi th respect to the transformations 
(14.2), is a requirement imposed by the observer so as to assure hirnself that his 
own description of what happens is independent of chance circumstances1 . Its 
consequences arerather trivialand may be read off from standard works on tensor 
algebra and tensor calculus. For example, the usual rules of tensor composition 
remain valid, a tensor whose components in one particular ;r system and one 
particular X system vanish is a zero tensor, etc. 
17. Deformation gradients. The two sets of deformation gradients xkK and XKk 
are defined by ' ' 
(17.1) 
The deformation gradients are the fundamental quantities for the analysis of 
local properties of the deformation. Their physical components are dimensionless, 
as are all measures of relative configuration. 
From (17.1) follows 
( 17.2) 
Each of these formulae denotes a system of nine linear equations in nine unknowns, either the x~K or the Xl!k. That a unique solution exists follows from 
(16.4). The solution by CRAMER's'rule, expressing each Xl!k as a rational function 
of the nine x7'M, was first given by EuLER 2 : ' 
(17.3) 
where in the second form KM P and kmp are the same cyclic permutations 
of 1 2 3· 
To calculate the derivatives of one set of deformation gradients with respect 
to the other, it is easiest to differentiate (17.2), thus obtaining 
OX~M XM = - xk ax~ = - xk tJM tJm 
(JXK ;p ;M oXK ;M K p ' ;m ;m 
(17.4) 
1 Three classes of ordinary differential invariants present themselves: those with respect 
to the deformation (16.2), those with respect to the co-ordinate transformations (14.2) 1 
at X, and those with respect to the co-ordinate transformations ( 14.2)2 at x. A single quantity 
may enjoy a quite different invariant character in each of these three classes. For example, 
the element of volume dv at x is an absolute scalar with respect to changes of Co-ordinates 
bothat x and at X, but by (20.9) below, dv and dV are the values at x, and at X, respectively, 
of a scalar capacity with respect to the deformation (16.2). Relations between the three 
classes are discussed by WUNDHEILER [1932, 14] and HLAVATY [1933, 6]. 
2 [1762, 1] [1766, 1, § 36] [1770, 1, §§ 105-111]. PIOLA [1836, 1, § III, ~ 28] noted 
the easy identity 
246 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 18. 
whence by (17.2) follows 1 
0 x7 M _ D :r7 P P p _ k m - K - - M X.p x.M-- x.K x.M. 
(l)(;m ax;m ' ' ' ' ( 17.5) 
Hence 
k M o:r~M x.K ()"' = -X. ----' -- · • P ,p axK ' ;m 
( 17.6) 
by contraction follows 
( 17. 7) 
The usual formula for differentiating a determinant, combined with ( 17.3), 
yields jACOBI's identity 2 : 
a l.r/XI -~-k- = XI), I xfXI, u:r;K ' 
and the identity of EULER, PIOU., and J ACOB I 3 : 
a (xkKII.r/Xi) 
___ , 8-xk ____ = 0. 
( 17.8) 
( 17.9) 
The double vectors xkK and XI). are dnals of onc another and are different double fields. 
That is, xkK =!= g~ g'j( Xft~- The eas,iest way to see t'üs is to refer both to the common frame, 
in which g~ g'j( X~ h~s the value b~ o'j( azM;az"', while xkK has the value azk;azK, the 
expression of which in terms of the gradients ozMjozm is not linear bnt is of the form ( 17.3). 
The most important property of the deformation gradients is their law of 
composition. Consider two successive deformations, the first from X to X, the 
second from X to x. The chain rule of differential calculus asserts that 
(17.10) 
That is, to obtain the matrix of deformation gradients D for the succession of two 
deformations whose matrices of gradients are D 1 and D~, take the matrix product: 
(17.11) 
This simple and universal formula is not restricted to any particular choice of 
co-ordinates. We observe that in general. 
(17.12) 
18. Double tensor equations in terms of the total covariant derivative. Differential identities concerning the deformation are easily put in terms of double 
tensors by using the total covariant derivative explained in Sect. App. 20. When a 
relation connecting double tensors has been derived in the common frame, replacing 
partial derivatives by corresponding total covariant derivatives suffices to infer 
an identity valid in all co-ordinate systems. Since the deformation x = x (X) 
has a differentiable inverse X =X(x), we may use the chain rule (App.22.4). Thus 
the principle of duality stated in Sect. 14 applies to differential indices. 
1 TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 13]. 2 [1841, 3, § 8]. 3 While (17.9) was first given by PIOLA [1825, 2, § 253] [1848, 2, Eq. (22)] and jAcoBr [1844, 2, § 2], to derive it we need only to combine EuLER's Eq. (17.3) with his observation that o (skmp a,"' b, p)/oxk = 0 for any a and b [1770, 1, §§ 26, 49]. PIOLA [1836, J, § III, 
'I! 26] proved also that 
a K k T aAK/ 
o:rk(A x;Kfi.r/Xi) = axK l.r/XI. 
Sects. 19, 20. Displacement vector. 247 
For example, consider the equation 
(f x7Kb= 0. (18.1) 
where i is the dual of Jas defined by (16.5). In the common frame, (18.1) assumes 
the sameform as (17.9), which has already been derived. Therefore (18.1), being 
a double tensor equation, is valid in all co-ordinate systems1• By the principle 
of duality, we have also 
( 18.2) 
19. Displacement vector. The displacement vector u has the components z-Z 
in the common frame. These components are usually written 
u=x-X, v=y-Y, w=z-Z. 
The dual of u is -u. An invariant expression 2 for u is given by 
uK = pK _ pK, uk = pk _ pk, 
where P and p are the position vectors of X and ~. and pK = gf pk. 
( 19.1) 
(19.2) 
By differentiating (19.2) 1 and using (App.20.4), (App.22.4), and the fact 
that P/~ = b~, P7m=b7m• we get3 
(19.3) 
so that 
(19.4) 
These formulae express the deformation gradients x7 K in terms of the displacement gradients u~~, and conversely. To relate the two sets of displacement gradients, u~M and u.m, we have from (App. 20.4), (App. 22.6), and (19.4) the formula 
' ' 
u~M = (gf{ uk);M = gf{ u7m x';'M, } 
= gf! g';l(b~ + u;M) U~m· ( 19.5) 
More elaborate formulae giving any one compönent u~M explicitly in terms of 
the nine gradients u7m may be derived by putting the dual of (17.3) into (19.3) 
and then using the dual of (19.4). The formula (19.5) shows that while uk and 
uK are components of the same vector, u7m and u~M arenot components of the 
samedouble tensor field; this illustrates the caution following (App. 18.6). 
20. Elements of arc, surface, and volume. A curve f'C in 91 is deformed by 
(16.2) into a curve c in r. If dX is an element of arc along f'C, from the rule for 
change of variable in integrals follows (Fig. 3) 
f [ ... J dXK = f [ ... J X;5, dxk, (20.1) 
'II e 
1 A formal derivation in general co-ordinates is given by DOYLE and ERICKSEN [1956, 5, 
§ III]. 
2 We follow MICHAL [1947, 9, pp. 72-73). While the displacement vector figures largely 
in many of the older treatments and in approximate theories, KIRCHHOFF [1852, 1, p. 762] 
remarked that in general its introduction serves only to lengthen and complicate the formulae 
in which it appears. His remark is borne out by the only partially successful attempt of 
DuPONT [1931, 5, §§ 4-5, 8] to determine theinvariant character of u, but we believe that 
the present treatment achieves not only invariance but also simplicity. 
3 We follow TouPrN [1956, 20, § 4]. 
248 C. TRuESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 20. 
where the symbol J ... d • is used in the usual sense of integral calculus. Thus to 
study the local properties of the deformation, it is appropriate to define the field 
h in terms of the given field dX by the equation 
dXK =X~dxk. 
By (17.2), the unique solution d~ is given by 
dxk = x7K dXK. 
(20.2) 
(20.3) 
Upon these basic formulae, which are due to EuLER1, rests all the remaining analysis 
of thi$ subchapter. It is essential that d~ and dX arenot the same vector. By the 
results of Sect.App.16, the components of dX shifted to ~ aregi.dXK; as is natural, 
these shifted components are determined from the displacement of the single 
point X into the single point ~ and are independent of the deformation of neighboring points. On the contrary, the field d~ as given by (20.3) is a field deformed 
Fig. 3. The element d Xis deformed into the element d w. 
with the material, and to determine it we need to know the 
deformation in a neighborhood 
of ~. If dX is tangent to CC, then 
d~ is tangent to c (Fig. 3), and 
the length of d~ is adjusted 
in relation to the length of dX 
in such a way that the integral relation (20.1) holds. That 
is, the finite vector d~ and the 
symbol f ... dxk are related in 
just the same way as are the 
finiteincrementdxand thesymbol 
J ... dx in integral calculus. 
The meaning of the displacement gradients u~ K and u~ as measures of the 
local changes of length and angle is apparent from the relations 
dxk- fKdXK =U~KdXK, gf dxk- dXK =U~kdxk. (20.4) 
Simpler formal apparatus results from using the deformation gradients x~K 
and XI!,., as will be done in most of the rest of this work. 
Let X =X(L, M) represent a surface in the undeformed material. Then the 
element of area is the bivector 2 (cf. (App. 27.1)) 
dAKQ=2 i:JX[K oXOl dLdM - i:JL i:JM . (20.5) 
The deformed surface is ~ = ~(X(L, M)), with element of area 
d 
a kq=2 - i:Jx[k i:JL i:l.~ql i:JM dLdM ' l _ [k J i:JXK i:JXQ _ q i:JX[K oXOl - 2x;Kx'!oar oM dLdM -2 x7K x;oar-tfKrdLdM, 
=X~K xr0 dAKQ. 
' ' 
(20.6) 
1 [1762, 1] [1766, 1, § 36] [1770, 1, §§ 105-111]. Cf. LAGRANGE [1762, 2, §XLIV] 
[1788, 1, Part II, Sect. 11, 'I) 5]. 
2 As was noted by PIOLA [1848, 2, 'I) 12], the squared magnitude of the element of area 
is a quadratic form in Jacobians: 
2- 1 KP - K i:JX[P i:JXQl i:JX[R i:JXS] 2 (dA) - 2 dA dAKP- e PQ eKRS fJL- i:JM ----ar:- i:JM (dL dM) . 
Sect. 20. Elements of arc, surface, and volume. 249 
(Many works employ the equivalent covariant vector 
- axP axQ d M- 1 P . dAK - eK PQ 7iL BM~ L d - 2 eK PQ dA Q, (20.7) 
in terms of it, (20.6) becomes the formula of NANSON 1 : 
dak = ]Xlj.dAK .) (20.8) 
The ratio of the magnitudes dajdA will be calculated in Sect. 29. 
The similarity of (20.3) and (20.6) is immediate: They assert that the elements 
of arc and area are contravariant with the deformation 2 • The reasoning by which 
we derived the two formulae is intentionally somewhat different, for each proof 
illustrates a general argument which can be applied to either quantity, as weil 
as to derive the formula of EuLER3 relating elements of volume in the deformed 
and undeformed material: 
dv =] dV (20.9) 
where dv = VCiet gk-:: dx 1 dx2 dx3, dV =V det gK~ dX1 dX2 dX3• As CAUCHY 4 remarked, this relation shows that (16.6) is a mathematical expression of the 
principle of permanence of matter (Sect. 16). 
At the beginning of this section we indicated two different ways of looking 
upon such differential transformation formulae as (20.2) and (20.6). A third 
way, which derives from EULER and still is commonly used in works by engineers and physicists, is to consider two '' neighboring" points XI and X 2 ; 
setting dX=X2 -XI, we say that dXis "small". XI andX2 are displaced by 
(16.2) to ;xi and ;x2 , and by the theorem of mean value we get 
(20.10) 
where the derivatives x7K are evaluated at ;xi· If we set d;x =;x2 - ;xi, then 
(20.10) yields (20.3) in first approximation. While the language in the foregoing 
statements is loose, the argument is essentially rigorous. We prefer to avoid 
this approach not only because of the appearance of looseness but also because 
it is unnecessarily elaborate. The relation between dX and d;x as so defined is 
not linear except in first approximation. For sufficiently smooth deformations, 
greater accuracy can be obtained if we replace (20.10) by 
x~- X~=XkKdXK +~ -- °K2
xk M-dXKdXM +0(dX3 ), (20.11) • 2 ax ax 
1 [1878, 8]. 
2 APPELL [1901, 2] has remarked that if, corresponding to a field A in the material at X, 
we assign a field a at x according to the covariant rule, viz .. 
then it follows that 
ako=X~kAK, 
a[k;m] = X~kX~A[K;M]· 
That is, the successive curls of a field transformed covariantly with the deformation also 
transform covariantly with the deformation. 
3 [1762, 1] [1770, 1, §§ 112-118]. 
4 [1827, 5, 1-st Part, Sect. 1, § 8]. Cf. HADAMARD [1903, 11, '\[ 4]. From (20.9) we have 
for a sequence of deformations dv=,hd~, d~=.hdV, and therefore J=.h.h; this same 
result follows from ( 1 7 .11) and the rule for the determinant of a product of matrices and may 
have motivated the formal proof given by PIOLA [1848, 2, '\[ 45] in this connection, independ ently of the researches of J ACOBI. 
250 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 21. 
or by a full power series. Such more accurate expressions for the distance of 
neighboring points have rarely been used in physical problems 1. Either of the 
two approaches used at the beginning of this section permits a rigorous treatment based on ideas just sufficient for the use to which the results are to be put. 
To avoid all possibility of confusion, we repeat that we choose to regard the differential element dX as an arbitrary (i.e. finite) contravariant vector at X and 
dx as the vector at x into which dX is deformed by the linear transformation 
(20.3). 
Note added in proof. So as to construct a general theory of dislocations, 
KRÖNER 2 has replaced (20. 3) by a linear relation which is not generally integrable: 
(20.12) 
I.e., a deformation carrying X to x generally fails to exist. Metric concepts are 
not used; KRÖN ER analyzes (20.12) in terms of an affine connection, generally 
with non-vanishing torsion, which is constructed from Ak, the essential tensor 
being defined in a fashion similar to (61.7) below. 
Appendix to Part a). Geometrical representations of second-order tensors. 
This appendix 3 concerns a subject that belongs rather to the theory of invariants than to the 
classical field theories but is traditionally included in expositians of elasticity and plasticity, in 
connection with which the results were first obtained. We feel compelled to include this material 
rather for completeness than for any real use we can see in it. For consecutive development of 
kinematical theory, the reader should turn at once to Sect. 25. 
21. Quadrics of symmetric tensors. Corresponding to a symmetric second-order tensor 
a at a point :r, the central quadric 
( 21.1) 
where p is the position vector issuing from x, is called the quadric of a. In (21.1), both signs 
are used when both yield real quadrics; otherwise, one chooses that sign which does. In 
the former case, the quadric is a pair of conjugate hyperboloids, their asymptotic cone 4 
being the locus of points p suchthat F(p) = O; in the latter, it is an ellipsoid. 
The tangentplane at p is the locus of points p* such that 
(p*- p) · n = o, (21.2) 
where n is any non-null vector proportional to the normal vector grad F = 2a · p = 2p · a. 
We set n = a · p and use (21.1) to obtain from (21.2) 
(21. 3) 
In a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system zk with origin at x, the quadric intersects the 
r-th co-ordinate axis at the point z0 given by Pm= (jmr z~ (r unsummed), and the tangent 
plane at this point intersects the s-th co-ordinate axis at the point z* 0 given by P% = (jks z: o 
1 PIOLA [1848, 2, "i["i[ 73-74) wrote 
(Lf s) ~gk".(u~-uf) (ur- u'J'), 
= CKM dXK dXM + CKMP dXK dXM dXP + CKMPQ dXK dXM dXPdXQ + ... , 
calculated CKM• CKMP• and CKMPQ explicitly, and asserted that CKMP• CKMPQ• ... can 
be expressed in terms of the derivatives of CKM• which is the same tensorasthat defined 
by (26.2) below. Geometrie interpretations of the second derivatives of the deformation have 
been found by LE Roux [1911, 9, 10, 11] [1913, 5]. HADAMARD [1903, 11, "i["i[ 57-60] 
considered deformations suchthat x~K = gk, x~K 2 ... K,._1 =0, x~K 2 ... K,.=I= 0. 
2 [1960, 3, §§ 4-6]. Cf. also KRÖNERand SEEGER [1959, 8, §§ 1-2]. 3 We are indebted to J. L. ERICKSEN for assistance in preparing this appendix. 4 FRITSCHE [ 1939, 8] gives a simple geometric construction of the asymptotic directions 
of a plane tensor. 
Sect. 21. Quadrics of symmetric tensors. 
(s unsummed). Inscrting these values of p* and p in (21.3) yields 
a,s= ± J<2f(ziOz~). 
251 
(21.4) 
Therefore a, s = 0 if and only if one of these intercepts is infinite. \Vhen r = s, we have 
zi0 = z~ = ± p, whence it follows that the normal component of a for the direction of a coordinate axis is inversely proportional to the square of the magnitude of the parallel radius vector 
of the quadric 1• Of course, this direction may be assigned arbitrarily; another form of this 
invariant property follows directly from {21.1), since 
{21.5) 
where v is a unit vector parallel to p. A corresponding result for any orthogonal shear component can be read off from (21.4). 
Since a · p and p are parallel if and only if p is a proper vector of a, the principal directions of a are the directions for which the position vector is normal to the quadric, which 
means they are the directions of the principal axes of the quadric. The squared magnitude of 
the position vector in such a direction is inversely proportional to the corresponding proper 
number a of a, for if akm P"'= a Pk• then 
ak,..pkp"'=aP2= ±1<2. {21.6) 
A necessary and sufficient condition that two proper numbers of a be equal is that the 
quadric a be a surface of revolution; that three be equal, a sphere. The latter property motivates the name spherical for symmetric tensors that are scalar multiples of 1. 
The vector n = ± a · pf K2 is normal to the quadric at p. For it, p · n = ± akmpkpmf J<2 = 1, 
so its magnitude is the reciprocal of the distance from the center of the quadric to the tangent 
plane through p. Let p*""" n be interpreted as a position vector issuing from the center of the 
quadric, and assume a-1 exists. Asp sweeps out the quadric, p* then sweeps out the reciprocal or director qttadric of a, coaxial with the former quadric 2 and satisfying the equation 
(21.7) 
The asymptutic cone of this quadric is the locus of normals to the asymptotic cone of the 
quadric of a. It is called the shear cone 3 of a. The normal component of a in any direction 
lying in this cone is zeru. 
{21.7)4 maybe given a different interpretation 4 : Interpret n1, as co-ordinates of n-tdimensional planes in n dimensions 5, pk as point Coordinates, and take nk pk- 1 = o as the 
condition that a point p and plane n be incident. A tangent plane n and point of tangency 
p of the quadric of a are incident and related by nk = ± akm pmf K 2, whence it follows that 
(21.7)4 with p* replaced by n is the equation, in plane co-ordinates, of the quadric of a, 
regarded as the envelope of its tangent planes. We always have in mind the former interpretation of (21.7) when we speak of the reciprocal or director quadric. 
One can interpret a as a linear transformation, transforming any given vector q into 
the vector 
p=a·q. {21.8) 
Geometrically, q and p are represented, respectively, by vectors parallel to the normal and 
radins vectors of the director quadric of a. Equivalently, they are represented by vectors 
parallel, respectively, to the radius and normal vectors of the quadric of a. From (21.8), 
the vectors q producing vectors p of given non-zero magnitude p satisfy 
{21.9) 
1 CAUCHY [1827, 1]. Much of the theory of quadric representations of symmetric tensors 
had been implicit though not distinctly stated in work of FRESNEL done in 1822 but not 
published until much later [1868, 6, §§ 8-9] [1868, 7, §§ 7-8]. 2 LAME and CLAPEYRON [1833. 2, pp. 486- 508] introduced the reciprocal quadric of the 
stress tensor of a continuous medium, for which ToDHUNTER and PEARSON [1886, 4, p. 546] 
introduced the name "stress director". It was discussed further by WARREN [ 1862, 5] and 
FINGER [ 1892, 3, p. 11 07]. 
3 This cone was first discussed by LAME and CLAPEYRON [ 1833. 2, pp. 486- 508]. Cf. 
LAME [1852. 2, § 23]. 4 FINGER [1892, 4]. 5 Planeco-ordinatesare discussed in various works on projective geometry, e.g., VEBLEN 
and YouNG [1910, 9, § 68]. 
252 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 22. 
Since the left member of (21.9) is non-negative, the quadric of a2 is always an ellipsoid. From 
(21.9) we have 
(21.1 0) 
where u is a unit vector parallel to q. In other words, the length of the radius vector of the 
ellipsoid (21.9) is inversely proportional to the length of the image v = a · u under the mapping 
(21.8) of a unit vector parallel to this radius vector. Since the proper vectors of aareproper 
vectors of a2, principal axes of the quadric of a are principal axes of the quadric 1 of a2 . 
Given the two quadrics 
a1kmpkpm= ± 1, a2kmpkpm = 1, (21.11) 
one can easily construct the vector ~a · q, where q is any given unit vector 2. As noted 
above, q must be normal to the quadric (21.11) 1 at the point whose radius vector has the 
direction of p0 . Its magnitudeisthat of the parallel radius vector to the quadric (21.11) 2. 
To construct p 0 , one thus determines the point of tangency of a tangentplane to the quadric 
(21.11 h which has q as unit normal. To within sign, p0 is then determined as a radius vector 
of the quadric (21.11 )2 which is parallel to the line connecting this point of tangency to the 
common center of the quadrics. The ambiguity in sign is easily eliminated if one notes that, 
since p0 · q = q · a · q = ± 1, the angle determined by p0 and q is acute or obtuse according 
as the upper or lower sign holds in (21. 11)1 . The transformation (21.8) maps orthogonal 
vectors q1 and q2 onto vectors p1 and p2 conjugate with respect to the quadric (21.11) 2, i.e. 
(21.12) 
whenever q1 and q2 are orthogonal. 
The quadric representation of a symmetric tensor a, tagether with the extremal properties 
of the proper numbers obtained in Problem 1 of Sect. App. 46, enables us to describe the locus 
of directions for which the normal component has a given value K. First, it is necessary 
and sufficient that a1 ~ K ~an. Apart from the trivial case when a is spherical, this locus 
is a cone; while it is in general non-circular, it partakes of the symmetries of the quadric 
surfaces 3 . In particular, any possible value other than a1 or an for the normal component 
is assumed for infinitely many directions. Any direction lying in the cone if projected through 
;x or through any principal axis or principal plane yields another direction lying in the cone. 
In general, it seems easier to consider the trace of the cone upon the quadric of a, normalized 
so that akm pk pm = ± 1. This trace is the curve of intersection of the quadric with a sphere 
of radius J KJ-!, provided that in the hyperbolic case only the part of the hyperbola corresponding to the normal components of the appropriate sign be considered. When K = a1 
or an, the cone degenerates to a single line. For simplicity, take n = 3; the curve then has 
eight congruent parts. When the quadric is a tri-axial, the curve is skew and non-degenerate; 
if K =F a2 , it consists in two disjoint portions, while if K = a2 , it consists in two circles passing 
through the extremity of the intermediate principal axis. When the quadric is a quadric 
of revolution, the curve consists in a pair of circular normal sections. 
2~. Quadrics of asymmetric tensors 4 • Given any non-singular tensor a, not necessarily 
symmetric, one can form the two symmetric tensors a · a' and a' · a; since these tensors 
are positive definite (p. 841, footnote 5). their quadrics are ellipsoids. From the polar 
decomposition theorem (App.43.4), tagether with (App. 43.7)1 , we see that these two ellipsoids 
congruent, or, equivalently, the proper numbers of a' · a and a · a' coincide, as follows are 
alternatively from SYLVESTER's theorem in Sect. App. 42. 
The problern is now to determine a from the two ellipsoids, recognizing that such a 
determination cannot be unique. First, we select one of the rotations o that carry one congruent ellipsoid into the other, thus satisfying (App. 43. 7h. Insertionofthis o and the positive 
square root s ~ (a · a') ~ into (App. 43.4)1 then gives one determination of a. 
Let a' be a second determination of a; then by (App. 43.4) we have an orthogonal o' 
such that 
a' = o' · (a' · a)~ = (a · a'); · o'. {22.1) 
1 The above facts were noted by CAUCHY [1827, 1], who was first to discuss the quadric 
of a2 . 
2 We follow LAME and CLAPEYRON [1833. 2], LAME [1852, 2, § 21]. 3 This was remarked by CAUCHY [1823, 1] [1827,2]. The cone was described by KELVIN 
and TAIT [1867, 3, §§ 166-168]. 4 That the quadrics of a·a' and a'·a areellipsoidswas noted by CAUCHY [1827, 2]. 
The remaining analysis in this section is adapted from work of FINGER [ 1892, 4]. 
Sects. 23, 24. MoHR's mapping, 253 
If we set o,""' o' · o-I, we verify that o, is orthogonal, and from (App. 43.4) and (22.1) we 
calcula te tha t 
a'= o,·a, o, · (a · a')~ · o\1 = (a · a')~. (22.2) 
Thus the second determination a' results from the first by a rotation under which the ellipsoid of a · a' is invariant. Conversely, if a is one determination and o, is any orthogonal 
matrix satisfying (22.2) 2, then a' as given by (22.2h is another determination. 
The foregoing results show that to within the ambiguity characterized by (22.2), any 
non-singular tensor a is characterized by two congruent ellipsoids, those of a · a' and a' · a. 
It is equally well characterized by numerous other pairs of quadrics, e.g., those of (a · a')§ 
and (a' · a)~. Cf. Sect. 32. 
23. BOUSSINESQ'S construction. In the three-dimensional case, BoussrNESQ1 devised 
an elegant construction for the vector 
u 0 ""'a·v, (23.1) 
where a is a symmetric tensor with known proper numbers and vectors and v is any given 
unit vector. For convenience, we assume that the proper numbers of a are distinct and 
ordered as usual : a 1 > a2 > a 3 • Let 
so that 
bl = al-t (al + aa) = t (al- aa)' l 
b2 = a2 - t (a1 + a3 ), 
b3 = a3 - t (a1 + a3) = t (a3 - a1) = - b1 • 
Clearly b1>b2>b3 , b1>0. From (23.1) and (23.2) we have 
u 0 = u + t (a1 + a3) v, u ~ b ·V; 
(23 .2) 
(23-3) 
( 23.4) 
thus from given u and v one can construct u 0 . We thus concentrate on constructing u for 
given v. Refer b to a reetangular Cartesian principal co-ordinate system zk. In this system, 
and 
(v1)2 + (v2)2 + (va)2 = 1 
u2 ""' u · u = v · b 2 • v = (b1 ) 2 [(v1) 2 + (v3) 2] + (b2) 2 (v?) 2 ') 
= (b1)2 + [(bz)2- (b1)2J (v2)2' 
= (b1)2 + [(bz)2- (bl)2] cos2 <j>, 
(23. 5) 
where <j> is the angle determined by v and the proper vector of b corresponding to b2 , 
cos <j> ""' v2 • The angle 1p determined by u and this proper vector is given by 
cos1p = u2 ju = b2vd(b1)2 + [(b2)2- (b1)2J cos2<j>}-~. } 
= b2 cos <j> {(b1) 2 + [(b2) 2 - (b1) 2] cos2 <j>} -§. (23 .6) 
Projecting u and v on a plane z2 = const yields the components (b1 v1 , 0, - b1 v3 ) and 
(v1, 0, v3) respectively, so the projected vectors make equal angles with the z1-axis, supplementary angles with the z3-axis. 
The above facts imply that u is given by the following construction: In the plane of the 
proper vectors corresponding to the two larger proper numbers b1 and b2 , draw a unit vector making 
the same angle <j> with the proper vector corresponding to b2 as does v. In the same plane, draw 
a vector of magnitude {(b1)2- [(b2) 2- (b1) 2 ] cos2 <j>}~ which makes the angle 1p, given by (23.6), 
with the proper vector corresponding to b2 , and which lies on the same side of this proper vector 
as does the first vector. Rotate the two vectors thus constructed ab out the proper vector corresponding 
to b2 through equal but opposite angles until the first vector coincides with v. The second vector 
will then coincide with u. 
24. MOHR'S mapping. For any symmetric tensor a in three dimensions, one has 
(24.1) 
where X(v) and Y(v) are, respectively, the normal component and the maximum shear 
component of a corresponding to the unit vector v. Eqs. (24.1) define a mapping of the unit 
1 [1877, 1]. An alternative procedure is given by GuEST [1939, 9]. 
254 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 24 
sphere v · v = 1 into the X- Y plane. Since (24.1) 2 is unaltered if Y is replaced by - Y, 
the image of the unit sphere is a region t symmetric with respect to the X-axis. In reetangular 
Cartesian principal Co-ordinates, (24.1) reads 
X = a1 (v1)2 + aa (va)a + aa (va)2 • Y2 = (a1)2 (vl)2 + (aa)2 (v2)2 + (aa)2 (va)2- X2 • } 
(v1)2 + (v2)2 + (va)2 = 1 • (24.2) 
whence 
(24.)) 
The image of a curve on the sphere whose radius vector makes a con~tant angle with the 
proper vector of a corresponding to ab• i.e., a curve vb = const, is thus a circle with center 
on the X-axis at X= i(ac +ab). (b, c, b =1= ), whose squared radius is given by the right 
member of (24.3) 2 • From (24.2)3 and (24.3). the region t consists of the points interior to the 
largest and exterior to the two smallest of the three circles given by 
(X _ ab ~ a, r + y 2 = (ab ~ a, r b =I= c (24.4) 
points on the boundary being included in t. If a1 =a2 =a3 , t reduces to the point (a1 , 0). 
If two, but not three, proper values of a coincide, t reduces to a circle. In all other cases, 
its area is non-zero. The circles (24.4) -more precisely, their centers-uniquely determine 
the proper numbers of a. For two tensors a and b suchthat b = o · a · o-1, where o is orthogonal, the corresponding regions t coincide; conversely the. boundary of t determines a to 
within an orthogonal transformation. 
Adding to a a tensorproportional to 1 does not alter Y but adds a constant to X. The 
effect is thus to translate the region t parallel to the X-axis. Since X and Y arehomogeneaus 
of degree one in a, multiplying a by any non-zero scalar factor effects a uniform expansion 1 
of 1. It is easy to show, conversely that, if the regions 1 corresponding to two tensors a and b 
differ only by a translationparallel to the X-axis and a uniform expansion, then, assuming 
a =1= 0, there exist scalars A and B and an orthogonal tensor o such that 2 b = A o · a · o-1 + B1. 
In any number of dimensions (24.1) defines a mapping of the unit sphere into the X- Y 
plane. In two dimensions, the unit circle v · v = 1 is mapped onto the circle 
(24. 5) 
In this case 
(24.6) 
so the center and radius of the circle (24.5) are easily obtained from the components of a 
given in any co-ordinate system3 . There seems tobe no equally simple method of constructing the region t in three dimensions from components given in an arbitrary co-ordinate system. 
There is an extensive Iiterature concerned with applications of MoHR's mapping, much of 
it to theories of yield or rupture of solids 4• 
By making transformations of the formX*=X* (X, Y, a1 , a2 , a3). Y*= Y* (X, Y, a1 , a2 , a3). 
one can obtain other plane representations of a which are essentially equivalent to MoHR's, 
but which may be more convenient for some purposes. CHARREAU 5 has considered the 
1 The facts thus far noted are contained in papers by MoHR [1882, 3] [1900, 8] [1914, 8, 
pp. 192-235]. JUNG [1947, 7] gives an earlier (1866) reference to CuLMANN, which may 
contain some of the material given above. We have been unable to see CuLMANN's work. 2 KLOTTER [1933, 7] discusses the relation between the maps of a, its deviator 0a, and 
the tensor b defined by b""'Aa + B1. 3 Further discussion of the plane case is given, e.g., by NADAI [1950, 20, Chap. 10], 
FRAGER and HODGE [1951, 20, Chap. 5], DEWULF [1947, 4], FADLE [1940, 10], and WISE 
[1940, 18]. 4 Cf. NADAI [1950, 20, Chap. 15], ToRRE [1946, 8] [1951, 26], BöKER [1915,1], v. KARMAN 
[1911, 8] [1912, 5] for discussion and further references. 5 [1945, J]. 
Sect. 25. Stretch, extension, elongation, and shear. 255 
case X*= X, Y*= k (X2+ Y2), where k is a positive constant, Y* then being proportional 
to the squared magnitude of the vector a · v, CHARREAU and DuPONTl discuss the case 
it being assumed that a1 > a2 > a3 . The latter transformation maps the unit sphere v · v = 1 
onto a triangular region in the X*, Y* plane. 
b) Strain. 
25. Stretch, extension, elongation, and shear. The change in length and 
relative direction occasioned by deformation is called, loosely, strain2• 
By (20.3), an element of arc dX at Xis deformed into an element of arc d~ 
at ~- Since (20.3) is linear and homogeneous, the ratio of lengths dxfdX is independent of the original length d X and hence for given displacement gradients is 
a function only of the direction of dX. Let N be a unit vector along dX at X. 
Then the stretch A.(N) in the direction of N is defined by 
dx 
A(N) = dX' 
while the extension 15(N) is defined by 
15(N) = A(N) - 1 0 
(2S.1) 
(25.2) 
For the range of possible values of A. and 15, the axiom of continuity (Sect. 16) 
yields 
0 < A(N) < oo, - 1 < 15(N)< tX>. (25.3) 
In view of the remarks at the beginning of Sect. 20 we may interpret (25.1) 
by means of the length L of a finite arc~ emanating from X and tangent there 
to N, and the length L +L1 L of the arc c at ~ into which ~ is deformed. Wehave 
, L" L + LlL ( ) A(NJ= tm- -- 25.4 L-->0 L 
We agree not to dualize the concept of stretch. That is, letting l+L1l be the 
length of an arc c' emanating from ~ and tangent there to n, while l is the length 
of the arc ~ at X from which c' was deformed, we set 
If we choose c' as c, then l = L and L1 L = L1l, and we get 
A(N) = A(n) • 
(25 0 5) 
(25.6) 
This identification is not necessary, however, and it is convenient to specify 
stretch sometimes in terms of directions at X, sometimes in terms of directions 
at ~. The important fact just established is that the totality of stretches is the 
same, whether the undeformed or the deformed material is used for reference. 
Elements parallel to N are lengthened or shortened according as A(NJ > 1 
or A.(NJ < 1, or according as 15(NJ is positive or negative. Doubling the length 
corresponds to A. = 2, 15 = 1 ; halving the length, to A. = i, d = - i. Thus A. is 
1 [1945, 1]; [1944, 5]. 2 This term is due to RANKINE [1851, 1, Sect. I, § 5], bothin generaland for the tensor E 
satisfying the relations (57.10). 
256 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 25. 
multiplicatively symmetric with respect to lengthening and shortening but not 
additively so, while ~ is not symmetric at all. 
An additively symmetrical measure of strain I (Ä.) must satisfy 
1(1/Ä.) =-I(Ä). (25.7) 
Among the infinitely many smooth functions that conform to this requirement arel 
I(Ä) =log Ä., 
4 I (Ä.) = - arc tan Ä. - 1 , n 
- oo < 1 (A) < + oo, l 
- 1 < I (A) < + t . (25.8) 
For doubling the length these measures have the respective values log 2 and 4/n arctan 2- 1. 
The difficulties which stand in the way of using such measures as thesewill be mentioned in 
Sect. 33. The stretch itself furnishes the most immediate measure of strain and is the basic 
concept in all serious studies of the subject. 
Fora given pair of points in a given deformation, there are in general infinitely 
many stretches, but they are not independent; as we shall see in Sect. 27, a 
properly selected set of three suffices to determine them all. 
Returning to the definition of extension, if before calculating the ratio of 
lengths we project d~ upon the direction of dX, the result is called the elongation 
e(N) in the direction of dX: 
_ dxKdXK B(N)=(d~-1. (25 .9) 
Thus for elements which are turned through an obtuse angle the elongation is 
always negative. Elongation is not necessarily a measure of change of shape. 
For example, in a rigid rotation through a positive angle, every extension is zero, 
but every element not parallel to the axis suffers a negative elongation. More 
generally, from the definitions (25.1), (25.2), and (25.9) follows 
(25.10) 
it is possible for e(N) to assume any finite value. In the case of an element whose 
direction is unaltered by the deformation, we have e(N) = ~(N). The condition 
e(N) = -1 is necessary and sufficient that the element be turned through a 
right angle, irrespective of its stretch. An identity connecting elongation and 
stretch is given as (35.3) below. 
Let dX1 and dX2 be two elements at X, and let them be deformed into the 
elements d~l and d~2 at ~. Let unit tangents be Nl' N2' nl' n2 0 If e(N,, N,) is 
the angle between dX1 and dX2 , while f9(N,,N,) -y(N,,N,) is the angle between 
d~1 and d~ • then Y(N,,N,)• the decrease in angle, is the shear of the directions 
N 1 , N2 . The concept of shear is not dualized. Thus with n1 , n2 as defined we 
have 
(25.11) 
The axiom of continuity forbids a shear equal to a right angle: I y I<-! n for all 
pairs of directions. 
From the linearity of (20.3) follow certain symmetries. First, the stretches 
of oppositely directed elements are equal: 
(25.12) 
1 According to MEHMKE [1897, 5, §I], (25.8h was used by IMBERT in 1880 to describethe 
extension of rubber. Cf. LuDWIK [1909, 7, Pt. 1, §I]. 
Sect. 26. The deformation tensors of CAUCHY and GREEN. 257 
Second, the shears of oppositely directed pairs of elements are the same, and 
reversal of one of a pair of elements changes the sign of the shear: 
(25.13) 
In most cases there is thus no loss in generality if we take shear as an acute 
angle: 0 ~ y < {- n. 
26. The deformation tensors of CAUCHY and GREEN. The theory of finite 
strain is the creation of CAUCHY1. He observed that (20.2) put into the formula 
d52=gKMdXKdXM for the squared element of length at X gives 
(26.1) 
c is Cauchy's deformation tensor 2• As we shall see, aU changes of length and 
angle are easily calculated from the values of the components ckm· The formulae 
dual to (26.1) are 
(26.2) 
C is Green's deformation tensor 3• Since c and C are metric tensors, their matrices are non-singular. In the common frame CAUCHY's and GREEN's tensors 
have the familiar forms 4 
c x x = ( 1 + :; r + ( t: r + ( ~; r. 
CX'" = (1 + Ou). ou_ + jv_ (1 + 01!_) + OW OW 
• ax oY ax aY ax aY · (26.3) 
( ou )2 ( ov )2 ( ow )2 Czz = 1 - -ox + Bx + fiX- ' 
c =-(1- ~)~-- _av(1- 81!_) + j_!l!_!_UJ_ zy OX oy OX oy ox oy ' ... ' 
where u, v, w are the components of the displacement vector (19.1). The tensors c 
and C are different tensors; i.e., ckm=I=Ckm in general. A formula relating c 
to Cis given as (37.6) below. 
Since C and c serve to measure all lengths, it is obvious that the stretches 
and shears can be expressed in terms of them. In fact, for the stretches in the 
directions of the unit vectors N and n, by (25.4) and (25.5) we get 
(26.4) 
(the dissymetry in the definition of stretch accounts for the failure of duality 
here). Thus the normal components (Sect. App. 45) of C and c in the directions N 
and n, respectively, are the squares and reciprocal squares of the stretches in those 
directions. If we let A1 and ./.1 be the stretches and Ll 1 and <51 the extensions in 
1 [1823, J] [1827, 2] [1841. J]. 
2 [1827, 2, Eqs. (10), {11)]. Cf. also LE Roux [1911, 9]. 
3 While the tensor C appears formally in work by PIOLA [1836, I, Eq. (139)] [1848, 2' 
~ 34], its components were first interpreted by GREEN [1841, 2, pp. 295-296]. Cf. also 
CAUCHY [1841, J, §I, Eq. (15)]. 
4 Corresponding explicit forms for cylindrical and revolution co-ordinates are written 
out by MAZZARELLA [1954, 15]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 17 
258 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The classical Field Theories. Sect. 26. 
the directions of the X1 and x1 co-ordinate curves, then1 
(26.5) 
Since there need be no connection between the choices of ;E co-ordinates and of 
X co-ordinates, there is no simple relation between A1 and .A.1 . When it is necessary to observe this distinction, we use the symbols A and L1 for stretch and 
extension of elements at X. 
The shear J'(N1, N2) of the directions NI, N 2 may be calculated from 
cos e(N1,N2 ) = gKM Nlli~M, 
(€) ) _ ... CKMNIK ~M cos (NJ, N2) - J'(NJ, Nz) - -V-- p V =R 5 , CpQ ~ ~Q CRs Nz Nz (26.6) 
= 1 c NK N.M 
Ä(NI)Ä(N2) KM I II . 
Thus the shear component (Sect. App.45) of C for the directions NI andN2 is insufficient to determine the shear of those directions. In fact, if we write S for the 
right-hand side of (26.6)a, we obtain 
siny(N1,N2 ) = Ssin8(N1,N2 )-V1-S2 cos8(N1,N2 ). (26.7) 
From (26.6), a necessary and sufficient condition that the shear of the directions 
NI , N 2 be zero is that the ratio of the corresponding shear components of C and g 
equal the product of the stretches in the directions N 1 and N 2 • For orthogonal 
shears (26.7) reduces to 
(26.8) 
so that the vanishing of an orthogonal shear component of C is necessary and sufficient for the vanishing of the corresponding orthogonal shear. When applied to the 
directions of the X1 and X2 Co-ordinate curves, (26.6) and its dual become 
(26.9) 
where I;, 2 is the shear of the directions tangent to the X1 and X2 co-ordinate 
curves at X, while y12 is the shear of the directions which are deformed into the 
tangents to the x1 and x2 curves at ;E. Since the two systems of co-ordinates 
may be chosen independently at will, there is no simple relation between I;, 2 
and y12 • In the orthogonal case, i.e., 812 = !n and 012 -y12 =in, (26.9) reduces to 
. ." 1 cl2 0 ,, cl2 
sm _L 12 = A A . v-v- ' sm ?'12 =- JL1 JL2 V V 0 
1 2 Gn G22 gn g22 
(26.10) 
From (26.1 Oh we see that in the orthogonal case the shear component I C 121/V G11 V G 2 2 
constitutes an upper or a lower bound for sin I;, 2 according as surface area in the X 3 
co-ordinate surface be increased or decreased in deformation. 
1 Theseinterpretationsand (26.10) are due to GREEN [1841, 2, pp. 295-296]. Cf. E. and 
F. CossERAT [1896, 1, § 3]. While they may now be read off from familiar results in differential geometry, GREEN obtained them long before general co-ordinates were introduced in 
three dimensions, and in fact much of the theory of curvilinear co-ordinates grew out of 
continuum mechanics. 
Sect. 27. The strain ellipsoids and the principal stretches. I: Geometrical treatment. 259 
Shear is a property of a pair of directions. When these directions are selected 
as co-ordinate directions, it is obvious that the results obtained are not independent of the choice of co-ordinates. Shear is not an invariant concept unless 
the directions to which it refers are kept fixed. As we shall see in the next 
section, in any deformation at any points X and ~ it is always possible to find 
a system of orthogonal co-ordinates in which the Co-ordinate shears all vanish. 
The maximum shears will be determined in Sect. 28. 
A deformation is rigid if the distance between every pair of points is left 
unchanged. Necessary and sufficient that a deformation be rigidisthat at each 
point 
C=C=l. (26.11) 
At a single point where (26.11) is satisfied weshall say the deformation is locally 
rigid; when no confusion is likely, the qualification "locally" may be omitted. 
In order for every portion of a curve '?/ to be carried into a corresponding portion of a 
curve c of the same length, it is necessary and sufficient that the stretch in the direction 
of the tangent to '(]' be 1 at each point. A differential equation for inextended curves has 
been derived and discussed by CASTOLDI1. 
27. The strain ellipsoids and the principal stretches. I: Geometrical treatment. 
CAUCHY created his representation of symmetric tensors by quadric surfaces, 
which has been explained in Sect. 21, as a means of visualizing strain, inertia, 
and stress. The quadrics of C and c weshall call the strain ellipsoids at X and ~. 
respectively2• That these quadrics are indeed ellipsoids may be proved in many 
ways. The simplest proof consists in noting that by the axiom of continuity, 
there exists a sphere about ~ which contains the image of every sufficiently small 
sphere about X, and the only quadric contained in a sphere is an ellipsoid. This 
proof 3 involves the undesirable complications mentioned at the end of Sect. 20. 
An algebraic proof was given in Sect. App.43. For a formal yet geometric approach, consider the differential elements dX which sweep out a sphere of radius 
K at X, and hold K fixed. By (26.1) these dX are deformed into differential 
elements d~ which sweep out at ~ the quadric surface 
(27.1) 
Since g is a Euclidean metric tensor, the firstform is positive definite, and hence 
the quadric of the second form is an ellipsoid. 
Select a vector dX1 at X, and let dX2 be any vector in the plane perpendicular 
to dX1 , so that gKM dXf dX!f =0. By (20.2) and (26.1h follows 
(27.2) 
Now the gradient vector of the strain ellipsoid (27.1) at the terminus of d~1 
is 2ckm dx'J'. Since (27.2) asserts that d~2 is perpendicular to this gradient, we 
have derived Cauchy's firstfundamental theorem4 : An element of arc and 
its normal plane in an infinitesimal sphere at X are deformed into an element of arc 
and its confugate plane in the strain ellipsoid at ~. This theorem is often phrased 
1 [1950, 3]. 2 The quadric of C was called the strain ellipsoid by KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, § 160]; 
the quadric of c, the reciprocal strain ellipsoid by LovE [1906, Ii, § 6]. 3 This and other arguments based on geometrical considerations regarding infinitesimals 
were given by ST. VENANT [1864, 4] [1880, 10]. 4 [1828, 3, Ths. I and II]. Let .'JI'be the planeelementnormal to dX, and Iet it be deformed 
into p; according to GALLI [1933, Ii], for small deformation the normaltop subtends equal 
angles with d;n and dX, but this relation does not hold for arbitrary strains. 
17* 
260 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 2i. 
as follows: Perpendicular diameters of an infinitesimal sphere at X are deformed 
into conjugate diameters of the strain ellipsoid at ~. and conversely (Fig. 4). Cf. 
also the presentation in Sect. 21. 
Now a quadric has three diameters that are perpendicular to their conjugate planes, these diameters being its axes. The axes of the strain ellipsoid 
at ~ and X are called the principal axes of strain at ~ and X, respectively. Thus 
it follows from CAUCHY's theorem that there exists an orthogonal triad at X which 
Fig. 4. Perpendicular diameters of a sphere at X are deformed into 
conjugate diameters of an ellipsoid at a:. 
is deformed into an orthogonal triad1 
at ~. It is but a change of words 
to say that there exists at ~ an 
orthogonal triad which results 
from the deformation of a certain 
orthogonal triad at X. Therefore, 
by the property dual to the foregoing, the original orthogonal 
triad at X is a set of principal 
axes of strain at X. Thus follows 
another corollary of CAUCHY's theorem: The deformation rotates the principal 
axes of strain at X into the principal axes of strain at ~ (Fig. 5). 
For derivation of the last corollary, we have tacitly assumed that the lengths 
of the axes of the strain ellipsoid at ~ are all unequal, so that the principal axes 
Fig. 5. The strain ellipsoids at X and a:, showing the rotation of the 
principal axes of strain. 
"the" axes at ~ those directions into 
deformed. 
of strain are uniquely determined. 
If the ellipsoid degenerates into 
a spheroid or a sphere, an infinite 
number of orthogonal triads are 
deformed into orthogonal triads. 
Any one of these may be selected 
and called "the" principal axes 
of strain. In this case, so that 
the last corollary will remain 
correct as stated we take for 
which "the" axes at X are 
The stretch in a given direction was defined in Sect. 25. Since the diameters 
of an infinitesimal sphere at X are deformed into diameters of the strain ellipsoid 
at ~. the ratios of corresponding diameters are exactly the stretches. That is, the 
stretches in the several directions at a point vary as the distance from the point 
to the surface of the ellipsoid. Thus, as CAUCHY 2 remarked, the stretches are 
distributed symmetrically about the principal axes: in particular, any stretch that 
is not a principal stretch is experienced either in no direction or in infinitely 
many directions. Cf. the remarks at the end of Sect. 21. 
Similarly, the ratios of diameters of a sphere at ~ to corresponding diameters 
of the strain ellipsoid at X are the reciprocals of the stretches. Thus the Iongest 
axis of the ellipsoid at X is rotated into the shortest axis of the ellipsoid at ~. 
and if for one of the ellipsoids there is an axis of intermediate length, it is deformed into one of intermediate length for the other. Hence the strain ellipsoid 
at X degenerates to a spheroid or a sphere if and only if the strain ellipsoid at 
~ does so. The interpretation of stretches as proportional to diameters of an ellip1 By applying WEINGARTEN'S conditions (App. 48.3), TONOLO [1949, 32] has obtained 
necessary and sufficient conditions that the orthogonal triple of plane elements so determined 
envelop a triply orthogonal system of surfaces. 
8 [1823, 1] [1827, 2]. 
Sect. 28. The strain ellipsoids and the principal stretches. Il: Algebraic treatrnent. 261 
soid yields at once Cauchy's second fundamental theorem1 : At any point X 
there exists a direction in which the stretch is not less than in any other direction; 
a second, perpendicular to it, in which the stretch is not greater than in any other 
direction. The stretches in these two directions and in a mutually perpendicular 
third direction are uniquely defined pure numbers, the principal stretches A1 , A2 , A3 , 
satisfying 
(27.3) 
If A1 > A2 > A3 , the stretch A2 is a minimax. The lengths of the axes of the strain 
ellipsoid at x stand in the ratio A1 : A2 : A3 to one another; the lengths of the corresponding axes of the strain ellipsoid at X, in the reciprocal ratios. The directions in which 
A 1 , A2 , A3 are the stretches are the principal directions of strain at X; alternatively, 
they are the principal directions of strain at x. 
The principal stretches are the most important quantities connected with 
the strain. Their magnitudes determine the range of stretches, since every 
stretch A must satisfy ~ A~ A3 • If we know the attitudes of the principal 
axes of strain, either at x or at X, the values of the three principal stretches 
enable us to construct the strain ellipsoids and hence to determine the stretch 
in general as a function of direction. 
The extensions ~a corresponding to the principal stretches Aa are called the 
principal extensions. 
For a deformation to be locally rigid it is necessary and sufficient that 
a=1,2,3. (27.4) 
In a rigid displacernent, the strain quadrics are spheres, but the converse is not true. 
Indeed, suppose the quadric at X be a sphere. Then all stretches are equal, and C KM= Ä2gK M, 
so that frorn (26.6) follows 2 Y(NJ, N2) = 0. Thus the deforrnation is conforrnal. Again the 
converse is not true, since an inversion is conforrnal but need not produce equal stretches 
in all elernents3. 
28. The strain ellipsoids and the principal stretches, 11: Algebraic treatment. 
While the geometric proofs given in the foregoing section are rigorous, some 
readers will prefer algebraic demonstrations, which in any case bring with them 
formal apparatus useful later as well as some additional results. We preserve 
unity of treatment by making no reference to any of the theorems already derived 
by geometric means. However, we leave to the reader the geometrical interpretation of the formulae we now derive. 
Since by its definition (26.1) 2 the tensor c is real and symmetric, we may 
apply to it a now celebrated theorem of CAUCHY, first proved in this very connection 4 (cf. Sect. App. 37): The proper numbers c0 arereal; proper vectors corresponding 
to distinct proper numbers are orthogonal; and there exists a reetangular C artesian 
frame such that at x 
llc!ll = 
C1 0 0 
c2 0 
. c3 
(28.1) 
Since c is a Euclidean metric tensor, we have ckk > 0 in all co-ordinate systems, 
and hence by the theorem just stated it follows in particular that Ca > 0. The 
1 [1841, 1, §I] (in part, [1823, 1] [1827, 2]). 
z CrsoTTI [1944, 3, § 3]. 
3 Ün the basis of theorerns of CAUCHY and LIOUVILLE, SIGNORINI [1943, 6, ~~ 15-16] 
develops the properties of conforrnal strains. 4 Andin connection with the tensor of inertia, see Sect. 168 [1828, 1, pp. 15-17] [1841. 
1, Th. VIII]. 
262 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 28. 
directions of the co-ordinate axes in a system for which (2801) holds are principal 
directions of strain at ~- Dualstatements hold for C, whose proper numbers are C0 o 
Letl the vectors n0 be an orthogonal unit triad in the directions of the principal axes of strain at ~. so that 
while gkm n~ ng' = c5ab o Set N K-XK k/V- a = ;kna Ca 0 
Then by (2602) 2 , (1702), and (2802) follows 
and 
gKMN{- Nr =gKMX~Xt!,n~nl:'fVcac{,, l = ckm n~ nl:'fVc;i:-1,= cagkm n~ ngjVca cb, 
= c5nb o 
(28.2) 
(28.3) 
(28.4) 
(28o5) 
The results (28.4) and (2805) assert that the transformation (28-3) carries the 
orthogonal triad of unit proper vectors na of c with proper numbers Ca into an 
orthogonal triad of unit proper vectors Na of C with proper numbers Ca given by 
1 C0 = --0 
Ca 
(2806) 
The formula (28o3) sets the principal directions of strain at ~ into one-to-one 
correspondence with the principal directions of strain at X, the dual formula 
being (2807) 
Since the principal stretches An are defined as the stretches in the principal 
directions of strain, by (2801) and (26.4) we get 
(2808) 
incidentally verifying (2806)0 Hence by (2503) follows O<Cn< oo, O<ca< ooo 
The tensors C and c may be characterized as the unique symmetric tensors 
whose principal axes are the principal axes of strain at X and ~ and whose proper 
numbers are the squares and the reciprocal squares of the principal stretches, respectivelyo 
Let N be a unit ve.ctor at X; then its components in a reetangular Cartesian 
system whose axes are the principal axes of strain at X are cos (Na), where 
(Na) is the angle between N and the a-th principal axiso For the stretch in the 
direction of N, (2808)1 and the dual of (2801) put into (26.4) 1 yield 
)·(N) = V] A.~cos~(Na). (28.9) 
Similarly 
1 
A(n)= - -' V f cos~~na) n=1 n 
(28010) 
1 We fol!ow Tou:rno~'s arrangement of the argument [1953, 32, § 14]. 
Sect. 29. Further formulae relating to the deformation tensors. 
but it is essential to notice that whether or not n is taken in the direction into 
which the direction of N is deformed, the angles (Na) and (na) are in general 
different. 
By (26.6) 2 , the orthogonal shear for the directions of the unit vectors N 1 
and N2 is given by 
siny(N,,N,) = CKM UK VM, (28.11) 
where U and V are parallel to N 1 and N 2 and are subject to the restrictions 
CKMUKUM=1, CKMVKVM=1. Therefore the extreme values of the shears, 
which may be called the principal shears, are given at once by the solution of 
Problem 5 in Sect. App. 46: The pairs of directions in which the orthogonal shears 
are extreme are the same as those in which the shear components of e are extreme, 
namely, the pairs of directions at X that are normal to one principal axis of e and bisect 
the angles between the other two. The extreme values of the shear components of 
eare ± t (C1 -CJ), ± t (C2 - C3), ±t (C1 - C2). The extreme values of sin l{N,,N,l 
are ±(C1 -C3)j(C1 +C3 ), ±(C2 -C3)j(C2 +C3), ±(C1 -C2)j(C1 +C2 ). As it 
should be, this last statement is self-dual. Recalling the convention of Sect. 25 
that shears are always acute angles, for the principal shears Ya we have 
(28.12) 
where y2 is the greatest. 
29. Further formulae relating to the deformation tensors. Since c and e are 
positive definite, they have unique inverse tensors c-1 and e-1• From (26.1) 2 
and (26.2) 2 it is easy to verify thatl 
-rk k·K 
C m === X ' Xm;K' 
-r 
c~ = xK;k xM;k> (29.1) 
where we are using the notation of associated components. To interpret e-r, 
we calculate the magnitude of the element of area da at x in terms of the components dAK at X. By using (20.8), (30.5), and (29.1) 2 we obtain 
(da) =J2gkmX~mx;-;,.dAKdAM, 1 = IIIc CK M dAK dAM. J (29.2) 
Comparing this result with (26.2) 1 shows that the tensor IIIc e-r measures the 
ratios of areas in the same sense that the tensor e measures the ratios of lengths 2• 
The principle of duality enables us to assert an analogaus interpretation 
for IIIc e-r. 
If, in analogy to the theory of deformation of lengths, we were to construct 
a theory of deformation of areas, the formula (29.2) and its dual would enable 
us to proceed in steps parallel to those we have based upon (26.1) and (26.2). 
This fact enables us to assert a second principle oj duality: In any proposition 
concerning change of lengths and of angles between elements of length expressed in 
terms of the tensors e and c, a valid Proposition results if we replace "length ", 
e, and c by "area ", IIIc e-r, and IIIc e-r, and conversely. In particular, since 
e-r and e are co-axial, the extremal changes of area occur in elements normal 
1 The tensor c-1 was introduced by PIOLA [1833. 3, § 5] [1836, 1, Eqs. (142), {143), (152)]. 
FINGER [1894. 4, Eqs. (12), (31)] introduced IIIc c-1 and c-1. Cf. also [1892, 4]. 
2 TONOLO [1943, 8, § V.4] derived a formula which is essentially (29.2h; by substituting 
in it the dual of (37 .8), he observed that the rotation tensor cancels out, and hence the ratio 
dafdA can be calculated from the components C KM, as is immediate from our result (29.2) 2 . 
In this paragraph and the next two we follow TRUESDELL [1958. 10]. 
264 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 30. 
to the principal axes of strain, and the greatest (least) change of area occurs in 
the element normal to the axis of least (greatest) stretch. In fact, the extremal 
changes of area are AaAb, a=f=b, satisfying .?. .1. ~.?. .?. ~.?. .?. • 
In the notation of associated components, (26.1) 2 and (26.2) 2 read 
(29.3) 
From this result and from (29.1) we have~ 
~"' - (jP X + (jP X a//k"'_- (jm k;K + (jk m;K axK - k K;m m K;k, 0 p - p X pX , ;p X;K 
Ckm;p = XK;k Xfmp + XK;m X[\p, (29.4) 
(}km= xk;M xm + xm;M xk ;K ;MK ;MK· 
From (29.1h and (29.3) 2 we get 
(29.5) 
But by (App. 38.10) we have 
(29.6) 
Combining (29.5) and (29.6) yields an identity due to FINGER2 : 
(29.7) 
TRUESDELL3 noted that each of the deformation tensors may be expressed as the trace of 
a matrix of derivatives of one set of deformation gradients with respect to one another. 
The formulae areimmediate consequences of (17.5): 
k axK;k 
Cm=- axm;K' 
-lk oxk;K 
cm=-axK;m' (29.8) 
and their duals. 
By the theorem of SPOTTISWOODE given in Sect. App. 40, we may order the -1 -1 
proper numbers Ca and Ca of c-1 and C-1 in such a way that 
(29.9) 
The tensor c-1 is the deformation measure most commonly used in modern work 
on finite deformation, since ( 1) it is an ordinary symmetric tensor whose principal 
axes are the principal axes of strain in the deformed material (this distinguishes 
it from x~K, which is a non-trivially double field with 9 independent components 
rather than 6, and from C, whose principal axes are the principal axes of strain 
in the undeformed material), (2) it is a quadratic polynomial in derivatives with 
respect to points in the undeformed material (this distinguishes it from c), and 
(3) its proper numbers are the squares of principal stretches (this also distinguishes 
it from c). 
30. The strain invariants. The principal invariants Ia, Ila, lila of a tensor a 
have been discussed in Sect. App. 38. By (28.8) and (29.9) we have the following 
1 Cf. BONVICINI [1932, 3] [1935, 2]. 2 In the form given by FINGER [1894, 4, Eq. (34)], the invariants of c are replaced by 
those of C through (30.2). 3 [1952, 20, § 14]. 
Sect. 30. The strain invariants. 265 
expressions for the principal invariants of C, c-1, c, and c-1 in terms of the 
principal stretches 11.0 and principal extensions /)0 : 
Ic = Ic-1 = ll.j + A§ + II.~ = (1 + b1) 2 + (1 + b2) 2 + (1 + b3) 2 , 
Ilc = IIc-1 = II.] A§ + A~ II.~ + II.~ 11.], 
=(1 +b1) 2 (1 +b2) 2 +(1 +bJ2(1 +153) 2 +(1 +1.53) 2 (1 +151) 2 , 
IIIc= IIIc-1 = ;tpp~ = (1 + 15 1) 2 (1 + 152) 2 (1 + r5J2, 
1 1 1 
Ic = Ic-1 = -,2 + -1T + -"2 ' '-I Az 1.3 
1 1 1 
Ilc = IIc-1 = _12 02- + ·-12 12 + 12 "2- ' 11.1 Az Az A3 ''JI~J 
1 
Irre = IIIc-1 = 02 02 12 • /,JAzAJ 
Hence follow the fundamental identities 1 : 
IIc 
Ic = IIIc' 
(30.1) 
(30.2) 
As a corollary of these formulae and of the representation theorem for isotropic 
scalar functions 2 we have the fundamentallemma: An absolute scalar function 
of any one of the tensors c, c-1, C, C-I equals an absolute scalar function of any other. 
From (30.1) follows 
oo>I>O, oo>Il>O, oo > III > o, (30. 3) 
where the invariants are calculated from any of the measures C, c, c-1, c-1, 
or from C" or c", for any n. Moreover, since the principal invariants determine 
unique values of the proper numbers (Sect. App.38), corresponding to any assigned 
values of I 0 , II0 , and III0 satisfying (30. 3) and to any assigned principal directions 
at X, there exists a unique deformation tensor C. In particular the conditions 
l=Il=3, III = 1, (30.4) 
for any of the tensors cn or cn, are necessary and sufficient forarigid deformation. 
When the stretches are great, I0 , II0 , and III0 are also very large; when the 
stretches are small, I0 , II0 , and III0 are much smaller. The invariants of c show 
a reciprocal behavior. E.g., if the deformation doubles alllengths, then I0 , II0 , 
and III0 assume the values 12, 48, 64; Ic, Ilc, and IIIc, t. 1\. and lh· The 
axiom of continuity is violated at a point where any of the principal invariants 
equals 0 or oo. If I 0 = 0, all lengths are annulled; if I 0 = oo, at least one stretch 
is infinite. 
1 Doubtless these identities were known to CAUCHY. FINGER [1894, 4, Eq. (28)s] noted 
(30.2)1 but apparently did not realize its importance. (30.2) 2 follows from (30.2h by the principle of duality. Cf. also [1892, 4]. (30.2}a is really obvious, but apparently was first given, 
in the moreelaborateform (31.5) 6 7 , by ALMANSI [1911, 2, § 2] and HAMEL [1912, 4, §§ 364 
to 365]. In the form (31.5), all three identies are given an elaborate derivation by MuRNAGHAN [1937. 7, Appendix]. Apparently RIVLIN [1948, 27, § 3] was the first to state them in 
the simple and immediate form (30.2). As has been observed by SIGNORINI [1943, 6, '1!13], 
since C and c-1 have the sameproper numbers, (30.2) is no more than a rewriting of the weil 
known relation between the invariants of a matrix and of its inverse, immediate from SPOTTISWOODE's theorem. 
2 Since /(0 c o-1) =f(c) for any orthogonal transformation 0, f(c) =g(cl, Cz, cJ), where 
the function g is a symmetric function of its three arguments. Hence g (c 1 , c2 , c3) = h (Ic. Ilc, 
Illc). 
266 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 31. 
For any deformation, we derive by (26.2), the rule for the determinant of 
a product of matrices, and (16.5) the identity 
IIIc = det c~ = det gpq det gP Q (det x~K) 2 = p. (30.5} 
Hence by (20.9) follow CAUCHY's formulae 1 
dv = VI:IIcdV, dV = vnrcdv. (30.6} 
From these results and the inequalities (App. 39.10}a 4 we derive bonnds for the 
change of volume in terms of the first invariants of c' and C: 
(1 )-! dv (1 )! I. :::::; --- :::::; -- Ic 3 c - dV - 3 ' (30.7} 
with equality holding if and only if all three principal stretches are equal. 
It is of some use to express the principal strain invariants in terms of the elementary 
symmctric function of the principal extensions, which we shall denote by I6 , II6 , and III6 . 
Then 2 
(30.8) 
As a measure of strain magnitude we suggest 
(30.9) 
This measure vanishes if and only if the deformation is rigid, and it increases if 
the absolute value of any one extension increases while the others are held constant; moreover, lengthening and shortening are measured symmetrically. A 
simple measure of shear intensity is given by 
3= Va~ sin Ya· (30.10) 
By (28.12}, it is easy to express this measure in terms of the principal invariants 
of C, but the result is complicated. The octahedral invariant Uc, defined by 
(App. 38.11), is a measure of the intensity of the shear components of C, but 
for large strain this bears no simple relation to 3. 
31. The classical strain tensors and elongation tensors. Much of the older 
work on finite strain employsone orother of the strain tensors 3 E and e, defined by 
2E = C - 1, 2 e = 1 - c. (31.1) 
So as to reflect the dissymmetry in the definition of stretch (Sect. 25}, the defini tion (31.1) 2 takes - e as the dual of E. 
1 [1827, 2, Eq. (28)]. 2 The formula for the ratio of volumes was noted by BoussiNESQ [1912, 1, § 15]. 3 E was introduced by GREEN [1841, 2, p. 29] and Sr. VENANT [1844, 3] [1847, 3, § 2] 
and is probably the commonest strain measure even today. ALMANSI [1911, 1, § 2] and 
HAMEL [1912, 4, § 363] introduced e, which has figured largely in the Italian Iiterature and 
more recently has become popular with British authors, who often attribute it to CoKER 
and FILON [1931, 3, § 3.06]. Cf. also L. BRILLOUIN [1925, 2, § 4] [1938, 2, Chap. X, §VII] 
and MURNAGHAN [1937, 7, § 1]. 
Sect. 31. The classical strain tensors and elongation tensors. 
To interpret E, note that we may put (26.6) into the form 1 
Ä(N,) Ä(N2) cos (E)(NJoN2)- l'(N"Nz))- cos E)(N,,N2)) 
= CKMNfNzM- cos(oi)(N"N~), 
= 2EKMNfNzM. 
267 
(31.2) 
In terms of the gradients of the displacement vector, by (19.4) we have 2 
E K _ (K + 1 P;K M- U ;M) 2 U UP;M• k - (k -.! p;k em- u ;m) 2 u ftp;m• (31.3) 
the latter being the dual of the former since -u is the dual of u. The vanishing 
of either E or e is necessary and sufficient for a rigid displacement. The normal 
components of E and e are called normal strains; the shear components, shear 
strains. 
The principal strains Ea and ea are related to the principal stretches Äa and principal 
extensions da by 
2Ea= Ca-1 = A~-1 = (1 + da) 2 -1 = 2da+ 6~. } 
2ea= 1- Ca= 1- Ä.-; 2 = 1- (1 + 60)-2 = 2Ea(1 + c5a) 2 ; 
(31.4) 
hence by (25.3) follows -l < Ea < oo, - oo < ea < t. 
Formulae expressing the principal invariants of E and e in terms of those of c, C, etc., 
follow by (30.1). For examplea, 
lc = lllc Ilc-' = 3 - 2 le, ) 
Ilc= Illclc-'= 3- 41e+ 41Ie, 
(dvfdV) 2 = 1 + 21E + 41IE +SillE= IIIc, 
= (1 - 21e + 41Ie- 8IIIet1 = 11r1, 
(31.5) 
where in the last sequence (30.6) has been used. From these formulae and (30.3) may be 
read off4 inequalities satisfied by invariants of E and e. 
We may split the displacement gradients uK;M and uk;m into symmetric 
and skew-symmetric parts: 
uK;M=EKM+RKM• EKM~u<K;MJ• 
uk;m = ekm + ;:km• ekm = u(k;m)• 
RKM""" ulK;Ml•} 
r.~m = ulk;m]. 
(31.6) 
Since- u is the dual of u, it follows that- e and -T are the duals of E and R. 
To interpret E, begin by noting that from (19.4) and (20.3) we have 
dxK = gf{ dx" = (b~ + U~M) dXM, 
so that by (31.6)1 follows 
dxK = gKMg~ dx" = (gKM + EKM + RKM) dXM. 
1 Cf. CISOTTI [1944, 3, § 1]. 
(31.7) 
(31.8) 
2 u(~M) stands for gKPu(P;M)• etc. In the formulation given here, both the derivation 
of (31.2) and the proofthat Eis a tensor with respect to general transformations of co-ordinates are trivial. The result seems to be equivalent to that given in very elaborate form by 
E. and F. GossERAT [1896, 1, § 41], but perhaps it is toward this sameend that L. BRILLOUIN 
[1928, 2, § 4] [1925, 2, § 2] [1938, 2, Chap. X,§ 6] and DuPONT [1931, 6] [1931, 5, §§ 4-5] 
struggle with power series expansions (cf. also ToNOLO [1943, 8, § 1.2)). 
3 For references see footnote 1, p. 265. 
4 SIGNORINI [1943, 6, '1[9]. 
268 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 32. 
Hence by (25.9) we find for the elongation in the direction of dX 
- K M s(NJ = EKMN N : (31.9) 
The normal component of Ein the direction of N is the elongation in that direction. 
The tensor E, introduced by LovE1, is called the elongation tensor. Its quadric 
(Sect. 21) is the elongation quadric. Dual results hold for the dual tensor, - e. 
The two elongation tensors E and e are not strain measures (Sect. 32). That 
this is so is obvious from the remarks in Sect. 25: In general, the proper numbers 
of E and e are not functions of the principal stretches only. 
A geometrical interpretation for R will be given in Sect. 36, and in Sect. 38 it will be 
proved that R = 0 is a necessary but not sufficient condition for a pure strain, defined in 
Sect. 35. 
By (31.3) we may expressE as a function of E and H: 
(31.10) 
From this formula we see that E = 0 does not generally imply E = 0; in other words, if the 
elongations in three independent directions, even in three mutually perpendicular directions, 
are zero, it does not follow that the deformation is rigid. A non-linear condition for rigid 
deformation is obtained by equating to zero the right-hand side of (31.10). 
The elongation tensor E is a simple linear combination of displacement gradients, but 
it is not a strain measure. The strain tensor E is a strain measure, but it is a complicated 
quadratic function of the displacement gradients. By using E or e rather than C or c, 
much of the Iiterature on finite strain succeeds in making simple problems appear complicated. 
32. The equivalence of strain measures. Many measures of strain have been 
proposed, and there is a large literature (cf. the appendix to the next section) 
claiming to show that some one is better than all the others. While for a particular problern a particular choice of strain measure may be helpful, in general 
such contentions are futile. As WEISSENBERG (1946), REINER, and RICHTER 2 
have had the merit to observe, since the stretch of an arbitrary element can be 
calculated from the orientation of the element with respect to either set of axes 
of strain and from the values of the principal stretches, any measure sufficient 
to determine the directions of the principal axes of strain and the magnitudes 
of the principal stretches may be employed and is fully general. 
Now there are two sets of principal axes, those at X and those at x. From 
some quantities, such as the nine deformation gradients x~K, both these sets of 
axes may be determined. From others, such as the six CKM> the axes at X may 
be determined but not those at x. From yet others, such as the six ckm> we may 
find the axes at x but not those at X. Quantities of the last two types are called 
strain measures at X and at x, respectively, while quantities of the first type 
are measures of both strain and rotation. From the foregoing remarks and the 
representation theorem for isotropic tensor functions 3 follows the theorem of 
equivalence: A ny uniquely invertible isotropic second order tensor function of c 
is a strain measure at x; of C, at X. 
Also from the general theory of isotropic functions it follows that the two sets 
of strain measures obtained by the foregoing theorem consist in symmetric tensor 
fields, those of the former set having as their principal directions the principal axes 
of strain in the deformed material, while those of the latter set have as their 
1 [1892, 8, §§ 8-9]. 2 [1949, 36]; [1948, 23, § 3]; [1949, 26, § 3J. 3 While the assertion has a lang history, the first general proof is due to RrvuN and 
ERICKSEN [1955, 21, § 29]. Fora simpler proof, see §59 of Mathematical principles of classical 
fluid mechanics by J. SERRIN, this Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII/1. 
Sect. 33. Certain particular strain measures. 269 
principal directions the principal axes of strain in the undeformed material. 
Examples for the deformed material are c, c-1, and e; for the undeformed material, C, c-1, and E. 
It is possible to describe strain correctly by a measure which is not a tensor, 
but there can hardly be any advantage, and attempts of this kind have usually 
led to confusion if not disaster. 
I t is obvious that a description of strain in terms of a strain measure at ~ is 
not in generat equivalent to one in terms of a strain measure at X. In certain special 
situations the two descriptions may become equivalent, e.g. for phenomena 
in certain isotropic materials (the much abused term isotropic will be explained 
in Sect. 293y), or when the two sets of principal directions happen to coincide. 
33. Certain particular strain measures. Many students prefer to use a tensor 
whose proper numbers reduce for small extensions to the principal extensions 
!5a themselves. By (31.4), E and e are such tensors, but so also is 
___! (1 - cK) K -+- 0 
2K ' 1 ' (33.1) 
where we employ the K-th power of a tensor as defined by (App.41.2). Thus this 
requirement does not define a unique measure. The measures C} and c- ~ are 
attractive in that their proper numbers are exactly the principal stretches, but 
fractional powers are difficult to use in practice, since the components of such a 
tensor referred to co-ordinates other than principal are in general complicated 
infinite series in the displacement gradients. For example 
_ 1 _ c • = (1- 2e) • 1 = L., ~ -
(2n-1)!! _nT ___ e n , l n=O 
00 (2n-1)!! n = L --2n--;!- (1 - c) . n=O 
(33-2) 
By the theorem at the beginning of Sect. App. 42, the series converges if .A.3 >2-~. 
diverges if .A- <2-~. 
Similar objections apply to transeendental measures such as 
H- t log C = t log (1 + 2E), } 
h = - t log c = - t log (1- 2e), (33-3) 
where the definitions, which may be achieved by analytic continuation of the 
series for the logarithms, have a sense1 for all deformations since c and C are 
positive definite (Sect. 28). Since ha =Ha= log Aa, we have 
V-- dv 
Ih = In= log III0 = log -iV, (33.4) 
and accordingly the deviators of Hand h are zero for a uniform dilation ( Sect. 4 3) 
and thus may serve as distorsion tensors measuring change of shape apart 
from change of volume 2• While logarithmic measures of strain are a favorite in 
1 Rather than using the concepts of Sect. App. 42, it is preferable, in analogy to (App. 41.2), 
to define H as the unique symmetric tensor whose principal directions are the principal axes 
of strain at X and whose proper numbers are log Äa. 
2 REINER [1948, 23, § 7]. Cf. also the next footnote. 
270 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 33A. 
one-dimensional or semi-qualitative treatments 1, they have never been successfully applied in general. 
Such simplicity for certain problems as may result from a particular strain 
measure is bought at the cost of complexity for other problems. In a Euclidean 
space, distances are measured by a quadratic form, and attempt to elude this 
fact is unlikely to succeed. Most modern work uses the metric tensors c and C 
or their reciprocals c-1 and c-1. 
. 33A. Appendix. History of the theory of strain. 1. Early work. The idea of strain, that 
is, of relative rather than absolute change of configuration, seems to begin with the definition 
of what we here call extension, viz 
. changeinlength extens10n == . . , ongmal length 
which was introduced by BEECKMAN (1630) and ]AMES BERNOULLI (1705); the latter understood that a law relating stress to extension characterizes a material, while formulae relating 
force to change in length, favored by empiricists such as HooKE (1675), can refer only to 
a particular specimen. A detailed history has been written by TRUESDELL [1960, 4, §§ 3, 8, 
13, 20]. The history of one-dimensional strain measures given by MEHMKE [1897, 5] is 
misleadingly incomplete; the account of the early work by TonHUNTERand PEARSON [1886, 
4, Chap. I] is inaccurate as weil. 
2. Infinitesimal strain. The theory of small strain in a three-dimension~l medium was 
created by EuLER ( 17 50-1770), who dealt with time rates. For displacement, the theory 
of small strain was fully elaborated by CAUCHY (1822-1840), who obtained it by specialization from his general theory of finite strain. References to this work will be given in the course 
of our exposition of it in Part e of this subchapter. While CAUCHY was certainly influenced 
by the researches of FRESNEL, it is CAUCHY's special achievement to have disengaged and 
developed individually the concepts of strain, stress, and elasticity, which in FRESNEL's 
writing appear to be for the most part taken for granted. The work on special problems 
concerning deformable solids from the time of GALILEO (1638) through the researches of 
HoOKE (1675), LEIBNIZ (1685), }AMES BERNOULLI (1691-1705), PARENT (1713), EULER 
(1720-1776), DANIEL BERNOULLI (1734-1766), and COULOMB (1773-1784), even including 
NAVIER's derivation of the general equations of linear elasticity (1821), suffers from lack 
of a definite and explicit concept of strain as distinct from displacement but comprising 
extension, dilation, bending, shearing, and all other special deformations. A history of this 
work to 1788 is given by TRUESDELL [1960, 4]. 
3. Finite strain. References to all important work on three-dimensional finite strain 
have been given already in connection with the theory itself. Nothing was done prior to 
CAUCHY's time, and little has been added by the extensive subsequent literature. CAUCHY 
hirnself acknowledged, if somewhat vaguely [1841, 1, second sentence], a debt to earlier 
work in differential geometry. The mostrelevant part is provided by EuLER's and GAuss's 
work on the line element on a surface and in particular the theory of applicable surfaces; 
however, these developments, the history of which has been written by SPEISER [1955, 23] 
[1956, 19], by no means sufficed to make the theory of strain evident, especially since the 
now familiar formulae analogous to (26.3) for a curved surface embedded in Euclidean 
space, while discovered by EuLER, were not published until much later [1862, 3]. 
3a. Non-tensorial measures. GREEN in his first formulation [1839, 1, p. 249] laid down 
a reetangular system at X and took the extensions and changes of mutual angle suffered by 
the co-ordinate lines as measures of strain. KELVIN remarked that the usual strain measures 
are unsymmetrical in this sense, that each normal component is a function of the extension 
in but a single direction, while each shear component, being essentially a change of angle, 
depends upon the extensions in a pair of directions; he constructed a symmetrical specifica1 Cf. LUDWIK [1909, 7, Pt. ,, § 1], HENCKY [1928, 4, § 1] [1929, 2] [1929, 3, § 2], WEISSENBERG [1935, 10, pp. 59-60], BIEZENO and GRAMMEL [1939, 2, Chap. 1, '\115], REINER 
[1948, 23]. Noneofthis work is unequivocal as regards generalfinite strain, for which the 
definitions (33.3) were given by MURNAGHAN [1941, 3, p. 127) and RICHTER [1948, 24, § 2). 
Later RICHTER [1949, 26, § 3] worked out various special properties of h and H. Noticing 
that the condition of vanishing in uniform dilation does not determine a unique strain measure, 
RICHTER proposed a set of axioms, including a superposition principle for coaxial stretches, 
and showed that there are at aJ and X unique distorsion tensors [1949, 26, § 4] which satisfy 
them. This corrects an earlier attempt by MouFANG [1947, 10]; cf. [1948, 25]. RICHTER's 
distorsion tensors are complicated algebraic functions of e and E, respectively. 
Sect. 34. Conditions of compatibility. 271 
tion of strain in terms of the extensions of the edges of a tetrahedron [1877, 5, Chap. VIII, 
Ex. 1] [1902, 5]. DoRN and LATTER [1948, 8] used the logarithms of the principal stretches 
and the cosines of the angles. SwAINGER [1947, 15 and 16] [1948, 29 and 30] [1949, 30] 
[ 19 50, 29 and 30] [ 19 54, 23] claims to define a new linear strain measure, embellished with 
polemies against the classical strain measures and the authors who use them; his views have 
been criticized by GoRDON [1950, 8], TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 151 and § 171] [1955, 29], 
and RicHTER [1955. 20], among others, andin his numerous publications we have been unable 
to find anywhere a prescription for calculating his strain measure from a given displacement 
(but see the table below). The authors favoring logarithmic measures such as (25.8h and 
(33.3) usually call them "natural"; this term is applied by YosHIMURA [1953, .36] to 
-logtan}(}:n-y), where y is the shear. 
3b. Table of tensor measures. 
Author 
SIGNORINI [1930, 6, § 9]. (Most of 
SIGNORINI's work employs E or e) 
BIOT [1939, 3, § 1] [1939, 4, p. 118] [1939, 
5, p. 108] [1940, 3, § 1] 
MuRNAGHAN [1941, 3, pp. 127-128] (in 
reference to BIOT), RICHTER [1948, 24, §2] 
SWAINGER according to HERSHEY [1952, lJ] 
and REINER [1954, 20, § 4] 
MooNEY [1948, 15, pp. 435-436] 
ÜLDROYD [1950, 23, § 6] 
Definition 
}(c-1 -1) 
C~-1 
Special Property 
The case K= -1 in (33.1) 
The unique strain measure at X 
whose proper numbers are ba 
, The unique strain measure at x 
I whose proper numbers are Aa 
I The unique strain measure at x 
whose proper numbers are - ba 
(IIJc)lc-~~ III=1 
(IIIc)-kc dV=Illdv 
See also footnote 1, p. 256 and the formulae for logarithmic measures in Sect. 33. 
REINER [1948, 23, §§ 3, 5. 7] [1954, 20] and HERSHEY [1952, 11] present reviews of 
various definitions of strain and give comparative numerical values in simple cases. HANIN 
and REINER [1956, 11] work out the forms of the coefficients in formulae expressing one of 
the above measures as an isotropic function of another (cf. Sect. 33). 
3 c. Other discussions of strain. KILCHEVSKI [ 1938, 5, § § 3-7] regards the components of 
the metric tensors at X and at X as generalized anholonomic components of the same tensor. 
Setting Bf!;f ~ tgK M gkm• we have gkm = Bf!;f gKM, etc. He introduces a very generalmeasure of deformation which includes as special cases both the deformation tensor c and the 
stretching tensor d ( Sect. 82). HENCKY [ 1949, 13] on the basis of a discussion of a special 
kind of finite defdrmation of a finite element criticizes all strain measures which depend 
only on the deformation gradients and obtains formulae of the "projective" type L1 xk = 
A k LfXK, in which Ak depends on the shape of the original element and on a certain arbitrary 
vector; in passing to the Iimit of infinitesimal volume he gets a formula different from (20.3), 
but LoDE [1954, 13, § 3.3] pointsout an error in his work. LODE hirnself prefers to use x~K 
and rediscovers such formulae as (20.8). ' 
A correct theory of affine type is mentioned at the end of Sect. 20; cf. also Sect. 61. 
34. Conditions of compatibility. Given the deformation (16.2), it is a straighttorward matter to calculate the six components CKM by (26.2) 2 or to calculate 
any other measure of strain. Conversely, we may ask how to calculate the deformation when the components CKM are given as functioris of X. To solve this 
problern we have to integrate a system of six partial differential equations in 
three unknowns: k m -I (Xl x 2 xa) (
34.1) gkmX;KX;M- KM • • · 
Such a system, being overdetermined, in general admits no solution unless the 
assigned functions fKM satisfy a condition of integrability. 
In the present case, by (26.2) 1 CKM is a metric tensor of Euclidean threedimensional space. According to a well known theorem asserted by RrEMANN, 
a symmetric tensor akm is a metric tensor for Euclidean space if and only if it 
is a non-singular positive definite tensor such that the Riemann-Christoffel 
272 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 34 
tensor Rka~ps forrned from it vanish identically1. Various forrns of this tensor 
in the co-ordinates yk are 
R(a) _ a [-o { r } _ _ o { r } { s } { r } _ { s } { r }] kmpq- kr oyP mq oyq mp + mq sp mp sq ' 
where 
Hence 
1 ( iJ2akq iJ2akp iJ2amp iJ2amq ) 
= 2 aymoyP- -aymoyq + oyk oyq - ayk oyP + 
+ a,s ({;J {msp}- {krp} {~q})' 
=-+ °:~~-~u bk~ bp~ + a,s ({krq} {msp}- {/p} {~q}), 
= O[~m. q] - ~JI:m,,_p_l + { r }Cr mp]- f r} [r mq] oyP oyq kq ' \kp ' ' 
[p, km J == __1__ ( oakp + oapm - oakm)' 2 aym oyk oyP 
R(c) -o kmpq- ' R(cJ -o KMPQ- , 
(34.2) 
(34-3) 
(34.4) 
where in the former equations y =X, in the latter, y =X. There are six algebraically independent non-identically vanishing components of Rkmpq in a space 
of three dimensions. Either of the two sets of Eqs. (34.4) is referred to as the 
conditions of compatibility. 
Many equivalent forms have been found, of which we record only that given 
by GRAIFF 2 : 
EKM,PQ + -1 
EPQ,KM- EKP,MQ- EMQ,KP + I 
+CRs [(EMR,K + EK R,M- EKM,R) (EPs,Q + EQs,P- EFQ,s)-
- (EMR,Q + EQR,M- EMQ,R) (Eps,K + EKs,P- EPK,s)J = 0, 
(34.4a) 
where the covariant differentiation is based upon gJL· 
1 This theorem was asserted rather vaguely in RIEMANN's second Habilitationsschrift 
(1854) [1868, 13, §§ II 2, II 4, III 1]; in his Paris prize essay (1861) [1876, 5, Pars secunda], 
RrEMANN proved necessity and asserted that sufficiency is not difficult to prove. Priority 
in publication belongs to CHRISTOFFEL [1869, 1, §§ 1-6] [1869, 2] and L!PSCHITZ [1869, 3, 
§ 7] [1870, 2, Part I, § 8]. Fora modern proof, cf. e.g. VEBLEN [1927, 8, § V4]. Although 
geometry and mechanics were closer tagether in the last century than today, it was lang 
before students of elasticity theory (even including some great geometers) recognized the 
connection between the conditions of compatibility and the equivalence problern of Riemannian geometry. 
2 [1958, 3, Eq. (10)]. References for the linearized case will be given in Sect. 57. The general 
case has been treated by MANVILLE [1904, 5], MARCOLONGO [1905, 4], RIQUIER [1905, 5], 
CAFIERO [1906, 1, Chap. I, § 3], CRUDELI [1911, 3], BURGATTI [1914, 1, § 3], SIGNORINI [1930, 
4, § 2] [1942, Jl, p. 60] [1943, 6, Chap. 1, ~ 20], KILCHEVSKI [1938, 5, § 18] (including a fourdimensiona] generalization), ToNOLO [1943, 8, §IV], SETH [1944, 11], ZELMANOV [1948, 39, 
Eqs. (6),(7)], NovozHrLov [1948, 18, § 39], ÜLDROYD [1950, 23, § 5], GREEN and ZERNA [1950, 
10, § 4], ZERNA [1950, 36, § 4], SEUGLING [1950, 26], LODGE [1951, 15], GALIMOV [1951, 9], 
PLATRIER [1953, 21, 22], KOPPE [1956, 14]. FADOVA [1889, 7] was the first to recognize the 
geometrical nature of the problem, for the linearized case (cf. also the works of CAFIERO 
and CRUDELI just cited). 
Sect. 43. Conditions of compatibility. 273 
In some problems, it is useful to measure the strain with regard to different 
configurations for different particles 1. The duals of Eqs. (34.4a) are satisfied, 
but (34.4a) themselves need not be, and the tensor RifkPQ may be taken as a 
measure of the incompatibility of the reference configurations for different particles. 
The conditions (34.4) arenot independent since R(al, in virtue of its definition 
(34.2), satisfies the identities of BrANCHI 2, 
R (a)h + R(a)h + R(a)h _ 0 mpk, q mkq, p mqp, k- • (34.5) 
The implications of these identities in respect to solution of (34.4) arenot known; 
a simpler analogous problern which has been solved will be rnentioned later on 
in this section. 
lf a:1 (X) and a:2 (X) are any pair of solutions of (34.4), the difference p 1 -p2 
of the corresponding position vectors is a rigid displacement. 
In a problern formulated entirely in terms of the deforrnation, the conditions 
of compatibility need not be regarded, since they are satisfied automatically 
in virtue of the definitions of c and c: lt is only in a problern where the components of c or of C are thernselves taken as basic unknowns that the conditions 
of cornpatibility becorne additional equations to be solved. For such a problern 
any additional conditions imposed on c or on C must be compatible with (34.4). 
Consider the quantities Rkpmn defint>d by 
Rkpmn == t (akn, mp + apm, k••- akm, np - apn, km) +) -1 + ars (Apn.,Akns- Ap,.,Akms), 
Akpm == t (akm, p + apm, k- akp, ml • 
(34.6) 
where the comma denotes the covariant derivative based upon the metric tensor gkm· From 
this definition, the quantities Rkpmn form components of a tensor field; in a Euclidean 
space, we may choose a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system and by inspection of (34.2) 2 
conclude that R* = R in this co-ordinate system and hence in all co-ordinate systems. Thus 
in writing the conditions of compatibility ß<c> = 0, we may if we please replace partial 
derivatives by covariant derivatives 3 . 
We may pose an analogous question in regard to the elongation tensor E. 
In this case, the problern is a linear one: To find necessary and sufficient conditions that given a symmetric tensor E there exist a vector u such that 
(34.7) 
1 The intended application is to bodies initially stressed though free from applied Ioads. 
The stress may then be thought of as arising in response to deformation from natural states 
which are different for different particles. There is no natural state for the body as a whole. 
This idea was first put forward, it seems, by EcKART [1948, 10, §§ 1-2], though his discussion 
is obscured by remarks about cutting a body apart and by failure to take account of the 
fact that in a deformation in Euclidean space the conditions of compatibility need not be 
satisfied at points where the axiom of continuity (Sect. 16) is not satisfied. Cf. the criticism 
by TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 18']. While the idea that yield may be represented by a deformation from a hypothetical non-Euclidean space was expressed by KoNDO [1949, 15] [1950, 
14-16] [1954, 10] and by BrLBY, BuLLOUGH and SMITH [1955, 2, §§ 2-3], the first clear 
statement and formalism isthat of KRÖNERand SEEGER [1959, 8, §§ 1-2]. 
2 E.g., EISENHART [1926, 1, § 26]. For generalizations, cf. ScHOUTEN [1954, 21, Chap. III, 
§ 5]. 
3 ERICKSEN [1955, 6]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 18 
274 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 35· 
The desired condition is easily shown to have the following equivalent forms 1 : 
M~1 b~gffRT;SU = 0, eKMP eRST EMs; PT= 0, l 
EKN;MP + EPM;KN- EKM;NP- EPN;KM = 0, 
(34.8) 
the second of which is valid only in three-dimensional space, while the others 
remain true in n-space. 
There are six linearly independent, not identically vanishing conditions (34.8). 
While they resemble in some ways the conditions (34.4), in principle they are 
of a different kind, for they are conditions of integrability for the differential 
system (34.7) when (34.4) holds, i.e., when the space is assumed to be Euclidean. 
Conditions of this kind are discussed from a more general standpoint in Sect. 84. 
If we set 
(34.9) 
then we have identically 
~ +J~ +J~ - KPMN;R KPNR;M KPRM; N- 0, (34.10) 
a relation formally analogaus to the Bianchi identities (34.5) but presupposing that the space 
is flat. The conditions of compatibility (34.8) may be written in the form Jtf}.MN = 0. W AsHizu 2 
has shown that in virtue of the identities (34.10) and GREEN's transformation, the conditions 
(34.8) may be divided into two sets of three, viz., l(El = JCE) = J(E) = 0 and l(E) = llU ~1 3~ llll 
l (E) = J(E) = 0, such that if both sets are satisfied upon the boundary of a region then 2323 3131 ' 
the vanishing of either set in the interior implies the vanishing of both sets. Thus the degree 
of redundancy that the identities (34.10) imply in the conditions of compatibility (34.8) 
is rendered definite. 
If E satisfies (34.8), and if 0uK is any solution of EKM = u(K; M), then the most 
general solution is 
(34.11) 
where P is any vector satisfying P;~ = blf, ii is any skew-symmetric tensor 
satisfying RKM;Q=O, and Bis any vector satisfying BK;M=O. That is, the displacement corresponding to a given elongation tensor is indeterminate to within 
a vector having the same form as an infinitesimal rigid displacement. 
c) Rotation. 
35. Fundamental theorem. The results of CAUCHY presented in Sects. 25 to 27 
show that the stretch of every element is determined by either of the strain 
ellipsoids, providing the orientations of its axes in the common frame be specified. 
Both the stretch and the change in direction of every element are known if either 
ellipsoid and both sets of principal axes of strain are specified. Hence follows the 
fundamental theorem : The deformation at any point may be regarded as resulting 
from a translation, a rigid rotation of the principal axes of strain, and stretches 
along these axes. The translation, rotation, and stretch may be applied in any 
order, but their tensorial measures arenot independent of this order. 
This theorem, while obvious from CAUCHY's work, was not stated by hima; 
not only did he wait fourteen years after completing the theory of strain in all 
1 References to proofs are given in Sect. 57. 2 [1958, 12]. 3 It is given rather vaguely by KELVIN and TArT [1867, 3, § 182], and apparently LovE 
[1892, 8, § 10] was the first to assert it explicitly. 
Sect. 36. Thc mean rotation tensor of CAUCHY and NovozHrLov. 275 
detail before giving a theory of rotation (Sect. 36 below), but also his measure 
of rotation is not one of those that come at once to mind on stating the fundamental theorem. The theory of finite rotation has always presented singular 
difficulty, although the essential idea is simple. Perhaps the trouble lies in its 
being a truly Euclidean concept: Often those least desirous of generality are also 
least successful in grasping the special peculiarities afforded by a special case. 
The angle {} through which the element dX is rotated by the deformation 
follows at once from (20.3): 
(3 5 .1) 
with the convention 0 ~ {} ~ n. In particular, we may choose dX as a unit vector N, obtaining 
cos{} = ,..!- gKMgr XkpNK NP') 11(1\) ' 
1 mxK k p , gkmgK ·pn n · ll(n) ' 
Stretch, extension, rotation, and elongation (Sect. 25) are related thus 1 : 
s = }.. cos {} - 1 = (j cos {} - 2 sin 2 t {}, 
this being but another form of (3 5 .2). 
(3 5 .2) 
(3 5. 3) 
If we let na be a proper vector of c, we get for the angle {}a through which 
the deformation has turned it 
(3 5 .4) 
These three angles specify the rotation, since the a-th axis of strain at ~ lies on 
a cone of vertex angle {}a about the a-th axis of strain at X shifted to ~-
If the three angles {}a vanish, or, what is the same thing, if any two of them 
vanish, the rotation itself is said to vanish, and the deformation is called a pure 
strain. 
It is important to realize that while by definition the principal axes of strain 
are not rotated in a pure strain, it by no means follows that no linear elements 
suffer rotation. This is grasped most easily through an example. Suppose two 
tri-axial ellipsoids have axes mutually parallel hut of lengths in pairwise different 
ratios. Then a linear transformation of one into the other changes the orientation 
of every radius vector not lying along one of the axes. 
An algebraic criterion for invariant directions will be given in Sect. 38. 
36. The mean rotation tensor of CAUCHY and NovoZHILOV. CAUCHY 2 took 
as a measure of rotation the mean values of the angles through which all elements in each of three perpendicular planes are turned. Refer all quantities to 
the common frame. Let Nx be a unit vector perpendicular to the X-axis atZ, 
so that in terms of a real angle (/) we may write 
N x = j cos ifJ + k sin ifJ . (36.1) 
1 BoussrNESQ [1877, 1, § 3] described this formula and gave further discussion of the 
rotation by means of the apparatus of Sect. 23. 2 [1841, 1, Th. IV]. 
18* 
276 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 36. 
CAUCHY's departure from the ideas of Sect. 3 5 was to consider not {} as given 
by (35.2) but rather the angle {}x between Nx and the projection of nx upon the 
Y-Z plane. The slope of this projection is given by 
and 
t z,ycosiP+z,zsiniP an ({! = -'-.:...._---:,........,.__:.:=--::-
y,y cosiP + y,z sin IP ' 
Therefore (36.2) asserts that 
whence follows 
tan fJx + tan IP 
1 - tan fJx tan (/) 
z, y cos IP + z,z sin IP 
y, }" cos IP + y,z sin IP ' 
X y, y cos2 IP + (y,z + z, y) sin IP cos IP- z,z sin2 IP ' 
(36.2) 
(36.4) 
tan {} = z,ycos2fP+ (z,z- y,y) sin IPcos IP- y,z:sin2_<l>_l 
-Ryz+Eyzcos21P+ i(Ezz-Eyy) sin21P (36-5) ,..,., - ,..,.,- - --.....,- ---, 1 + Eyy cos2 IP + Ezz sin2 IP + Ezy sin 21P 
where RandEare defined by (31.6). Forthedetermination of {}x, the x-component of the deformation is not used. 
The expression (36.5) is periodic of period :n; in C/J, reflecting the fact that 
oppositely directed elements suffer equal rotations. From (36.5), {}x as an angle 
satisfying 0 ;o;;,{}x-;;;, :n; is uniquely determined with an important exception: {}x = 0 
and {}x = :n; are indistinguishable. 
CAUCHY's measure of rotation about the X-axis is 
2n " 
Xx = - 1
-J{}x ( C/J) difJ = _!_ J {}x (C/J) d(/J · 2n n (36.6) 
0 0 
However, CAUCHY failed to notice that because of its equivocal treatment of 
{}x =0 and {}x= :n; his formula (36.5) does not always determine {}x uniquely and 
hence is not sufficient to calculate Xx· To remedy this difficulty, we may easily 
replace (36.5) by a formula for cos {}x. However, despite the elegance of CAUCHY's 
concept, his measure of rotation has never been used. First, the angles Xx, XY, Xz 
do not form a vector field1. Second, the values of the mean rotations about 
three perpendicular axes do not suffice to determine the rotations of the individual elements at Z. 
NovozHILOV2 has most happily modified CAUCHY's definition by putting 
2n 
tan Tx = _.! __ Jtan {}x (C/J) difJ 2n 
0 
(36.7) 
in place of (36.6). The integration can now be performed explicitly; from (36.5) 2 
it is easy to see that in fact 
tan Tx = - Ryz 
~ --
2n 
j. 2n ~ ~ diP ~ , l 
0 1-:Eyycos2fP+. Ezzsin2fP+Ezysin21P 
-Ryz 
V(1 +Eyy){1 +Ezz) -.E.h . 
1 Their law of transformationwas calculated by CAUCHY [1841, 1, §I, Eq. (37)]. 
2 [1948, 18, § 7]. 
(36.8) 
Sect. 37. Algebraic proof of the fundamental theorem. 277 
This elegant formula of NovozHILOV shows that RKM is a measure of the mean 
rotation suffered by elements in the K-M plane 1 . 
While we have used a special Co-ordinate system, our results are easily put 
in invariant form. Let X1 = const be a surface at X, let X2 and X3 be Co-ordinates on that surface, and consider only transformations of these surface COordinates. Then, with dummy indices restricted to the range 2, 3, (36.5) reads 
-R23 +eKMNK E: NP tan{}x, = ~ 1 +EgsNQ N 5 (36.9) 
while (36.8) reads 
(36.10) 
where Ji is the two-dimensional tensor obtained from E by suppressing all 
components having the index 1. The formula (36.10) justifies our calling R the 
mean rotation tensor. 
Since R is a tensor, if it vanishes in some one co-ordinate system, it vanishes 
in all. In view of (36.10), therefore, if the mean rotations of the elements in three 
perpendicular planes at a point be 0 or n radians, the mean rotation of the elements in every plane at that point is 0 or n radians. 
As is indicated by the two possibilities in the foregoing statement, R, while 
indeed a measure of mean rotation, is not a measure of rotation alone. The easiest 
way to see this is to consider a rigid rotation through n radians: x =-X, y = - Y, 
z =Z. In such a rotation, R = 0. Since R = 0 if and only if there exists a displacement potential 2 U: 
(36.11) 
we may call deformations for which R =0 potential deformations. These will be 
characterized in Sect. 38. 
If we replace NovozHILov's measure of rotation by CAUCHY's or by the mean 
of cos {}x, we get a measure of rotation: only, but there is no simple expression 
for these measures in terms of ii and E. 
Since ii is a skew-symmetric tensor of;second order, we may always replace 
it by an axial vector, which we choose to define as follows: 
R-i curl u. (36.12) 
The context will make clear whether the vector or the tensor is intended by 
the symbol R. 
37. Algebraic proof of the fundamental theorem.r. The fundamental theorem of 
Sect. 3 5 is but an interpretation of the polar decomposition theorem in Sect. App. 43. 
Historically, however, the former was much the earlier and in fact gave rise to 
the latter. It is illuminating to give a different proof of the fundamental theorem, 
1 As was observed by KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, § 190], KELVIN's transformation 
(Sect. App. 28) yields an obvious but not very illuminating connection between Rand the mean 
rotation around a closed circuit: 
~uKdXK = fJ?KMdAKM. 
't' Y' 
The interpretation of R given by M. BRILLOUIN [1891, 1, § 1] is faulty, being based on an 
error in calculation. 
2 LOVE [1892, 8, § 12]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. Ill/1. 18a 
278 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 37. 
based indeed on the same ideas as the proof of FINGER, the CossERATS, and 
AUTONNE given in Sect. App. 43, but using the explicit formulae1 of Sect. 28. 
Let Na be an orthogonal triad at X, na an orthogonal triad at ~. If we shift 
the Nato ~. we can then exhibit a unique orthogonal tensor (cf. Sect. App. 43) 
R which rotates the shifted triad Na into the triad na: 
-1 -1 
k Rk mNK Rk NK NK ,..KRm k RK k na= mgK a = K a' a =15m kna= kna, (3 7.1) 
where the intermediate components RkK = Rk m g'f{ represent the translation from 
X to ~ followed by the rotation R. In terms of the reciprocal triads Na and na, 
we easily see that Rand R-1 assume the forms 
-1 
RkK = n~ N]i, RKk = NaK n~, (3 7.2) 
where we employ the summation convention for diagonally repeated German 
indices. The duals of (3 7.1 )1 are also formulae for the Na in terms of the na. 
Comparison of them with (37.1) 2 shows that R-1 is the dual of R, as is geometrically obvious, and yields the formulae 
-1 
Nf =RKMgttn~, n~ =g'J.tRMKNf. (37.3) 
For the rotation of the reciprocal triads we have 
(37.4) 
Thus far the triads na and Na are arbitrary. Henceforth we restriet them to 
be directed along the principal axes of strain at ~ and at X. There follows the 
necessary and sufficient condition for a pure strain: 
(37. 5) 
Co-ordinate forms of this condition are Rkm = b~, Rkm = gkm• RkK = g1c, etc. 
There is an important formula which with some justice may be called FINGER's 
theorem 2 : 
(37.6) 
whereby the n-th powers of c-1 and C are related. To prove it, we need only 
observe that by (28.6) and the theorems on matrices given in Sect. App. 37, the 
tensors on the two sides of the equation are symmetric tensors having the same 
proper numbers, while by the definition of R the principal axes of the two tensors 
coincide. A moreformal proof can be constructed from (App. 37.12)a, (37.1), and 
(37.4); also, the result may be read off from (App. 41.2). 
We turn now to a proof of the fundamental theorem. By the dual of (28.3) 
and (37.1) follows · 
X;K = X;M UK = X;M a K = a na K• (
37.
7) k k S!.M k NMNa v-c kNa } 
= RkM VCaNaM N]i. 
1 We follow TouPIN [1953, 32, pp. 595- 597] [1956, 20, § 4]. 
2 FINGER [1892, 4] studied the properties of a · a' and a' · a, where a is any non-singular 
matrix. Most of his results have been stated in Sect. 22. If we identify a with 1\ :r7 Kil, then 
one of his formulae is (37.6) with n = 1. The theoremwas given by RICHTER [1952, 17, § 2) 
for n = t; by NoLL [1955. 18, § 2b] for n = 1; and by TouPIN [1956, 20, § 4] for the general 
case. 
Sect. 37. Algebraic proof of the fundamental theorem. 
By (App. 37.12)3, this is equivalent to 
! • ! 
X~K = RkM Ctf = gtRPM Ctf = Rkmg'~Ctf. 
If in this we substitute the dual of (3 7.6) with n = - t, we get 
k -lkRm -lk Rm -.k -lk m RM X;K = Cm K = Cm k 5K = Cm gM K· 
Now in a pure strain, by (37.5) we get from (37.8) and (37.9) the formulae 
.. k _ k Ct M _ -i k m • x-;·K- g M K- Cm gK, 
in a translation, which isarigid pure strain, by (26.11) follows 
~K =rl-; 
279 
(37.8} 
(37-9) 
(37.10) 
(37.11} 
while in a more general rigid displacement, by (26.11) we get from (37.8) and 
(37-9) the formulae 
~K = gkMRMK = Rkmg'ß. (37.12} 
In view of these special cases and (17.11), we see that the four formulae (37.8) 2 , 
(37.8)3 , (37-9) 2 , and (37-9) 3 constitute statements of thefundamental theorem. 
For example, (37.8) 2 asserts that to obtain the set of nine x~x we may begin with 
stretches -"a along the principal axes of strain at X, then rotate those axes into 
the principal directions of strain at ~. then translate from X to ~- The remaining 
three formulae express similar decompositions in different orders. The dual 
formulae give corresponding expressions for X{).. 
From (37.8h follows 
(37.13) 
which may be regarded as an expression for the rotation tensor as an infinite 
series in the displacement gradients. The formulae (37.2) are much simpler, 
but they cannot be used until both sets of principal axes of strain have been 
calculated. 
By (19.3), equivalent to (37.8) is 
!. 
uK;M = Rx° CQM - gKM · (37.14) 
Hence we may connect the elongation tensor E and the mean rotation tensor ii 
with the rotation tensor R and the deformation tensor C: 
(37.16) 
No such simple formula of composition holds when ii =l= 0. 
For the general expression of a spatial rotation in terms of angles .or other 
parameters, the reader is referred to standard treatises on kinematics. Here we 
mention only EuLER's theorem that every rotation about a point may be regarded as a rotation about a line through the point and hence may be character-
280 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 38. 
ized by a unit vector and an angle. In the langnage of rnatrices, this theorern 
asserts that II RKMII if not the identity rnatrix possesses a real unit vector invariant, its axis A, uniquely deterrnined up to sign, and a real scalar invariant, 
its angle{), uniquely determined up to a convention of sign and quadrant. An 
expression for R in terrns of these two invariants is 1 
RK.u = cosf} b~ + (1 - cosf}) AK AM+ sin {) eKMPAP. (37.17) 
If we write R = R (A, fJ), then for the inverse rotation we have 
R-1 = R(A,- fJ): (37.18) 
In other words, the duals of A and {) are A and - {}, Also 
RKMAM=AK, RKK=R\=1 +2cosf}, R[KM]=sinf}eKMPAP. (37.19) 
This last forrnula asserts that the axial vector ! Rx points along the axis of rotation and has rnagnitude sin {). Alternative necessary and sufficient conditions 
for pure strain are 
RKK = 3 ' R[K M] = 0' {) = 0. 
Perhaps preferable to {) or RKK as a scalar rneasure of rotation is 
I\= sin2 ! {) = t (3 - RKK), 
(37.20) 
(37.21) 
since I\ vanishes if and only if the deforrnation isapure strain, and for deforrnations which are not pure strains it satisfies O< I\~ 1, with I\= 1 corresponding 
to a rotation through angle n. 
In surnrnary, every deformation carrying a neighborhood of X into a neighborhood 
of :r is specified locally by the translation from X to :r, the axis A, the angle of rotation {), either of the two sets of principal axes of strain, and the three principal 
stretches Aa . A study of further rnatters concerned with the separation of strain frorn 
rotation has been rnade by SIGNORINI 2. 
38, Invariant directions. A different question, first considered by KELVIN and 
TAIT 3, is to find the particular elernents dX which suffer no rotation. It is easiest 
to start with (20.3), which yields as the condition for such an invariant elernent 
gff dx~ = gff ~M dXM = b dXK, (38.1) 
where b is a real factor of proportionality. Thus it is necessary and sufficient 
that b satisfy 
det [(b- 1) b~- u~M] = 0, (38.2) 
where we have used (19.4). This is a real cubic. Since it has at least one real 
root, we obtain the theorem of Kelvin and Tait: In any deformation, at least 
one direction is left unaltered. By (16.4), b -:fo 0. Let D be the discrirninant of 
(38.2). Then if D> 0, there are three distinct invariant directions 4 ; if D<O, 
there is one and only one; if D = 0, there rnay be one, two, three, or an infinite 
nurnber. In Sect. 78 we shall solve a formally analogaus question where the 
1 FINGER [1892, 3, p. 1121] gave formulae forA and {)in terms of the Na and n0 • Cf. 
also SrGNORINI [1943, 6, ~ 11]. 2 [1943, 6, ~~ 20-28]. Cf. also the theorem of GRIOLI in Sect. 42. 
3 [1867, 3, § 181]. WARREN [1861, 2, § II] had asserted that there are three invariant 
directions in all cases, but he did not take up the question of their reality. 4 WARREN [1868, 16] asserted a geometrical relation between these three directions and 
the principal directions of strain, but the result appears tobe valid only insmall deformations. 
Sect. 38. Invariant directions. 281 
results are easier to interpret. Here we are content to remark that in the case 
D > 0 the three invariant directions need not be mutually orthogonal, but if 
they are, then a fortiori they are principal axes of strain at X and at 3J. Cf. the 
theorem of KELVIN and TAIT presented in Sect. App. 37. 
By (31.6h, the tensor whose proper numbers satisfy (38.2) is symmetric 
if and only if ii = 0. If ii = 0, (38.1) becomes identical with the equation for the 
principal elongations. Therefore R =0 is a necessary and sufficient condition 
that the principal axes of strain be invariant as lines. Alternatively, a necessary 
and sulficient condition that the principal axes of strain be deformed into themselves 
is that they coincide with the principal axes of elongation; equivalently, that there 
exist an orthogonal triple of invariant directions 1• Thus, in particular, the condition 
(38-3) 
is necessary for pure strain. But it is not sulficient 2• For in (38.1) it is possible 
that b< 0; i.e., what we have called an invariant direction includes the possibility 
of a reversal of sense. Suppose now (38.3) holds. Then, as already established, 
the principal axes of strain are invariant and coincide with the principal axes of 
elongation. By (16.4), it is impossible that just one or all three principal axes 
may be reversed in sense, but the case of two reversals is possible and corresponds 
to a rotation through angle :n; about one principal axis 3• Since when ii =0 the 
roots ba of (38.2) are related to the principal elongations through ba -1 =Ba, 
we see that if R =0 then either Ba> -1 for a = 1, 2, 3 or eise B1 > -1, B2 < -1, 
B3< -1, where B1 ~ Bz ~ B3 • Hence we have the following theorem: In apotential 
deformation which is not a pure strain, the axis of rotation is the axis of greatest 
elongation and the angle of rotation is a straight angle. The axis of greatest elongation may be either the axis of least stretch or the axis of greatest stretch. In 
terms of the measure l\ defined by (37.21), we have the following criterion: 
if R=O, then either l\=0 or l\=1. The former case isapure strain; the latter, 
a non-pure potential deformation in which the axis A points in the direction of 
greatest elongation. Conversely, l\ = 0 implies ii = 0, but in generat l\ = 1 does 
not imply R = 0. If we refer Rk m and RKM to the principal axes of strain, for a 
pure strain they both reduce to the unit matrix, while for a non-pure potential 
deformation they both reduce to one of the forms diag ( 1, - 1, - 1), diag (- 1, 
1, -1),diag (-1, -1, 1). 
Our considerations here are all local. By the axiom of continuity Sect. 16 
it follows that if R =0 along a curve, upon a surface, or throughout a region, 
then in the entirety of the said manifold the deformation is a pure strain or a 
non-pure potential deformation according as it is one or the other at some one 
point of the manifold. 
1 DARBoux [1901, 3] [1910, 5, §§ 319-330] found necessary and sufficient conditions 
that E have a triply orthogonal set of isostatic surfaces when R = 0. Cf. Sect. App. 48. He 
proved also that corresponding to any triply orthogonal family of surfaces there exist infinitely many potential deformations. ToNOLO [ 19 52, 20] has replaced DARBoux's complicated 
analysis by a short and elegant demonstration. 
2 Almost the entire literature on finite strain (e.g. LovE [1927, 6, § 33]) follows KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, § 183] in asserting erroneously that (38.3) is a sufficient condition for pure strain. Apparently the error and its correction were first noted by SIGNORINI [1943, 6, ~ 14]. 3 Our convention regarding the definition of principal axes when there are two or more 
equal principal stretches (Sect. 27) makes this case no exception to our statement here. 
282 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 39. 
In a potential deformation, (31.10) reduces to 
K ~K 1 ~KP ~ EM=EM+aE EpM, (38.4) 
Thus in a potential deformation Eis an isotropic function 1 of E. Moreover, from (38.4) we get 
Ea = !5a or - (2 + t'5a), (38.5) 
where for a pure strain the former alternative holds in all three cases, while for a non-pure 
potential deformation the former alternative holds only for the elongation along the axis. 
Fora potential deformation, from (37.15h we get 
i -1 ~ 
CKM=RKPCpQRMQ· (38.6) 
The rotation R therefore leaves the quadric of cl, and hence also the strain ellipsoid, invariant; this gives a second proof 2 of the theorem above. 
A different condition for invariant directions follows from the theorem at the beginning 
of Sect. App. 37: If a deformation with di~tin'Ct principal stretches is the succession of two pure 
strains, then there are three invariant directions. 
39. Composition of strains. For two successive defonnations, the first from X 
to X, the second from X to ~. we have the simple fonnula (17.10) for composition 
of the defonnation gradients. No such simple result is valid for the corresponding 
strains. We now seek to relate the Cauchy tensors for these two defonnations 
to the Cauchy tensor for tfie defonnation from X to ~- Equivalently, we compare the two measures of strain at ~ from the two different unstrained states X 
and X. By (26.1} 2 we get 3 
ckm =gKMX~Xf'!o =gKMX~KXftX~kX~m•} 
=hMX~kX~m• (39.1) 
where X~= oXKJoXK, x~k == oXKJox", and lc is the Cauchy tensor measuring 
the strain from X to X. By the dual of (37.8) follows 
-1 -1 i i 
ckm = lcK MRKpRMq2c~2c'f.., (39.2) 
where 2c is the Cauchy tensor measuring the strain from X to ~- This is the 
general law of composition of strains, or of change of strain reference. As would 
be expected, to calculate the strain from X to ~ a knowledge of the strains from 
X to X and from X to ~ is insufficient. In addition, knowledge of the rotation 
from X to ~ is necessary. 
In case the displacement from X to ~ is a pure strain, (39.2) becomes 
(39-3) 
which is not the ordinary matrix law of composition, being of the form c = 
2cl · 1c · 2cl. In the special case when ZK = Ä.b~-ZK, so that the strain from Z to 
1 In a work written in 1956 but not published, TouPIN has shown that in the case when 
the principal stretches are all distinct or all equal, R = 0 is necessary and sufficient that 
every principal direction of E be a principal direction of E. In the case when two principal 
stretches are equal, the strain ellipsoid is a spheroid, and rotating it about its axis of symmetry 
produces an equal elongation in all elements in its equatorial plane. Therefore the elongation 
quadric is also a quadric of revolution with the same axis. If the angle of rotation is not 
0 or n, we have .ii =1= 0, yet every principal axis of E is also a principal axis of E. This 
theorem was stated by ToUPIN without proof. 2 Given in the work of TouPIN mentioned in the preceding footnote. 3 The dual is given by LovE [1892, 8, § 10]. 
Sect. 40. Isochoric deformations. 283 
Z isauniform dilation (cf. Sect. 43), we get the obvious relation 
(39.4) 
hence 
(39-5) 
The multiplicative resolution (39.2) gives in general the simplest expression 
for a given strain in terms of composite strains and rotations. For some problems, however, a more complicated additive resolution is preferable. To obtain 
it, we begin with the dual of (39.1) 3 : 
cKM = 2cKMx~Kx~M = (gKM+22EKM) x~Kx~M· } 
= 1CKM+22EKMX~KX~M· (39.6) 
In this we substitute the formula that results from replacing ~ by X in (19.4), 
so obtaining1 
EKM=1EKM+2EKM+21UP;(K2EJ:I) } 
+ 2EPQ lUP;K JUQ;M· 
(39-7) 
The apparent simplicity of this formula is somewhat deceiving, since all tensors 
relating to either of the deformations are shifted to the point X. As would be expected of a result dual to (39.2), this one calculates the total strain in terms of the 
second strain, the first strain, and the first rotation. A more complicated result 
follows from (39-7) if we replace 1EKM and 1uK;M by their expressions in terms 
of ifKM and iiKM· 
By setting 1E =0 in (39.7) w~ get an expression for the change in the components of strain induced by a superposed rigid deformation. From (39.6) it 
follows that c = 1c if and only if 2E = 0; this is another way of saying that the 
components of c characterize the deformation to within a rigid deformation. 
d) Special deformations. 
40. Isochoric deformations. There are four important special types of deformation defined by conditions referring neither to a particular direction nor 
to a special geometrical configuration. The first three, rigid deformation, pure 
strain, and potential deformation, were defined in Sects. 26, 35, and 36. The 
fourth, isochoric deformation, is defined by the condition that volumes be unaltered. 
By (20.9), (16.5), (30.6), and (30.8) 4 , we get as alternative necessary and sufficient 
local conditions for an isochoric deformation 
and many other forms are easily found. 
In view of (40.1)a, by specialization from the fundamental theorem on isotropic 
scalar functions we conclude that in an isochoric deformation, an isotropic scalar 
function of c is equal to a function of Ic and IIc only. These two invariants satisfy 
a number of simple relations. First, (30.2) becomes 
(40.2) 
1 Cf. SIGNORINI [1943, 6, ~ 8]. 
284 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 41. 
Second, since Illc=Ä.~.:l~Ä.~ = 1, one of the principal stretches, say Ä.3 , can always 
be eliminated in terms of the others. For example, from (30.1) follows 
I0 =Ic-,= Ä.~ +Ä~+ ;.,\_~. (40.3) 
From this formula and (40.2) we conclude 
Ic, Ilc, Ic-'• Ilc-' ~ 3. (40.4) 
where the lower bound 3 is assumed in a rigid deformation. This is to be contrasted with the general case, where all that can be inferred is that the principal 
invariants are positive. 
In an isochoric deformation, from putting (40.1) 5 into (30.8)1 and (30.8) 2 we 
derive 
Ilc- 3 = Ic-,- 3 =- 4 II.,- 2 III., + (II.,+III.,) 2 , } 
(40.5) Ic- 3 = IIc-•- 3 =- 4 II., -10 III6 + II~ + 4 II6 III6 + 2III~. 
On the one hand, these identities put into (40.4) yield inequalities connecting 3 
the principal extensions. On the other hand, if we set c52= L c5~, then as c5-+0 
we have from (40.5) «=1 
(40.6) 
This, as RIVLIN1 has remarked, is tobe contrasted with the general case, where 
all that can be concluded isthat Ic-3, Ilc-3, and IIIc-1 are O(c5). 
41. Plane strain2• A deformation is said tobe a plane strain if there exists a 
family of parallel planes which are individually preserved, while the family of 
lines normal to these planes is preserved as a family. If we choose the preserved 
planes as reetangular co-ordinate planes and the remaining co-ordinate surfaces 
as cylinders normal to these planes, the deformation assumes the form 
x"=x"(Xl.,X2), k=1,2, z=Z=x3 =X3 • (41.1) 
To visualize the strain and discuss it, it suffices to restriet attention to points 
in the z = 0 plane, to replace the strain ellipsoids there by their elliptical sections 
by that plane, etc. 
The Cauchy and Greentensorsand the rotation tensor of a plane strain have 
matrices of the type 
0 
0 
0 0 1 
(41.2) 
Hence the z-direction at a point is both a principal axis of strain and the axis 
of rotation, so that the angle of rotation is the common angle through which 
the two principal axes lying in the z = 0 plane are tumed. 
A necessary and sufficient condition that one principal stretch be 1, and 
hence a necessary but not sufficient condition for a plane strain, is that the 
principal invariants of any one of the tensors c, C, c-1 and C-1 satisfy (App. 38.8). 
Since III =Ä.P.~. by (40.1) 3 it follows that a plane strain is isochoric if and only 
if the principal stretches are reciprocal to one another. By (App. 38.8), a necessary but 
not sufficient condition for plane isochoric strain is I0 = II0 . By (40.2h follows 
then Ic= Ic: In a plane isochoric strain, each principal invariant of any one of 
1 [1951. 22, § 21]. 
2 More detailed analysis is given by SIGNORINI [1943. 6, ~ 31]. 
Sect. 42. Homogeneaus strain. 285 
the tensors c, C, c-1, and C-1 equals the corresponding principal invariant of any 
other. 
Adeformation is said tobe a generalized plane strain 1 when (41.1) is replaced by 
k=1, 2, z=f(Z). (41.3) 
The planes Z = const are preserved as a family, but not necessarily individually. For example, 
there may be a uniform stretch Ä normal to these planes, so that z = ÄZ. A number of properties of plane strain carry over to the generalized case. For example, the z-direction is 
again both a principal axis of strain and the axis of rotation. The principal stretch in this 
direction is Ä = f'(Z). Since Ä1 and Ä2 are independent of Z, and since IIIc = J.7 Ä~ Ä 2, it follows 
that a generalized plane strain is isochoric if and only if Ä = const and Ä1 Ä2 = }.-1 • 
42. Homogeneous strain. A deformation is called a homogeneaus strain when 
every straight line is deformed into a straight line. Equivalently, every ellipse 
(including the circular special case) is deformed into an ellipse, or every ellipsoid 
is deformed into an ellipsoid. A formal and invariant local condition for homogeneous strain is 
( 42.1) 
of the many equivalent forms of this condition we note only 
1\;K=O, A~M=O, CKM;P=O. (42.2) 
The most convenient condition is that in the common frame the deformation 
( 1 5 .1) has the form 
Z=D·Z+B. z = n-1 . (z- B) ' ' (42.3) 
where matrix notation is used and where D is a real matrix with positive determinant and Bis a real constant vector. When referred to the common frame, all 
the measures of deformation and rotation (such as c, C, R, !\, A, R, E, etc.) 
are constants. There is no loss in generality in supposing the origin of the 
common frame so chosen that R = 0. 
Homogeneous strain was introduced and studied exhaustively by KELVIN 
and TAIT2 • For homogeneaus strain, the reservations expressed in Sect. 20 
become unnecessary, for finite line segments are deformed according to the same 
law as are differential elements in a general deformation. 
By uniformly extending initially circular or reetangular frames across which 
marked cloth or rubber sheets had previously been stretched, WEISSENBERG 3 
has obtained the beautiful illustrations of homogeneaus strains which are shown 
here as Fig. 6. 
By (20.10), we may choose to regard any deformation satisfying the axiom 
of continuity as a homogeneaus strain, with error 0 (dX2). Thus for general deformations all properties which depend only on x7K may be developed by application of appropriate theorems on homogeneous strain, and many authors attack 
the subject in this way. We follow the reverse procedure to this extent, that 
we leave to the reader the specialization of general results already obtained to 
the case of homogeneous strain. 
The following sections develop the properties of certain particularly important 
types of homogeneaus strain and certain of their generalizations. The co-ordinate 
system used is always reetangular Cartesian. 
1 The case z = ÄZ was introduced by LovE [1906, 5, § 94]. 2 [1867, 3, §§ 155-189]. Further geometrical properties were discussed by IsE: [1890, 
5, §§ II-III]; algebraic treatments were given by METZLER [1894, 6] and CAFIERO [1906, 
1, Chap. Il]. 3 [1935, 10, pp. 85-87] [1949, 37]. 
286 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 42. 
Sect. 42. Homogeneaus strain. 287 
Fig. 6 b. Various defonnation ellipsoids (after \\rEISSENBERG). 
288 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Ciassical Field Theories. Sect. 42. 
A necessary and sufficient condition for a homogeneaus isochoric strain to be 
plane is that the principal invariants of any one of the tensors c, C, c-1, and c-1 
satisfy 
I= II. (42.4) 
Fig. 6c. Various defonnation ellipsoids (alter WEISSENBERG). 
This is immediate from (App. 38.8), since by hypothesis the deformation is a homogeneous strain. 
Since J) in (42.3) is the matrix of deformation gradients, by (37.8) and (37-9) we have 
D = R · cl = c - L R, (42.5) 
where R is the rotation tensor defined by (37.1). GRroLI 1 has obtained a theorem of approximation which characterizes R. Let z = z (Z) and z* = z* (Z) be any two homogeneaus defor1 [1940, 12]. 
Sect. 42. Homogeneaus strain. 
mations, and define their deviation d(z*, z) by 
d(z*, z) ==o f Jz*- zJ2 dV, 
r. 
289 
(42.6) 
where j';, is a sphere of fixed radius a about Z. Given z, we now seek to determine z* as 
a rigid deformation minimizing d (z*, z). Since z* = R* · Z + B*, where R* is a rotation 
Fig. 6d. Various deformation ellipsoids (after WEISSENBERG). 
matrix, we have 
d(z*, z) = JJ (B*- B) + (R*- R · C~) · ZJ
r. 2 dV, l = JJR· {R-1 · (B*- B) + (R-t·R*- c') ·Z}J2dV, 
r. 
= JJB' + (R' - C~) ·ZJ 2 dV, 
r . 
where 
R'~ R-1 · (B*- B), 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. lll/1. 
R' = n-1 ·R*, 
(42.7) 
(42.8) 
1') 
290 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 43. 
and where the factor R, since it does not affect the length being integrated, was dropped 
in passing from (42.7) 2 to (42.7)a. Hence 
d(z*,z) = ~na B' + 2B' · (R'- C~) · fZdV + l 
-r-. 
+ (R'- C~) · ( fZZdV) · (R'- cl)'. 
-r-. 
Fig. 6e. Various defonnation ellipsoids (alter WEISSENBERG). 
Since 1';, is a sphere, by choosing the origin of Z at its center we get 
d(z*, z) = !na3 B' 2 + 1
4
5 na5 (RJ.m-lkm) (~km.- tkml.l = fna3 [B' 2+ }a2 (3 + Ic- 2RkmCkm)], 
(42.9) 
(42.10) 
where we have used BoRCHARDT's theorem in Sect. App. 40 and the fact that (R')-1 = (R')'. 
k 
Since R' is a matrix of direction cosines, we have I Rl.ml ;:;;: 1, and h ence J Ri,mCkml ~ ~. - 3 
with equality holdingifandonlyif R' = l. Since3+Ic-2I ;=11 =o ~6~. from (42.10) 
we conclude that a~l 
(42.11) 
where equality holds if and only if B' = 0, R' = 1. These conditions, by (42.8). are equivalent 
toB*= B, R* = R. We have proved Grioli's theorem: Let a given homogeneaus strain be 
decomposed into a lranslation, rolation, and a pure strain; then the Iranslaiion and the rotation 
are precisely those defining the rigid deformation whose deviation from the given strain is the 
least possible. 
43. Uniform dilation. A pure homogeneaus deformation in which the principal 
stretches have a common value, A., is called a uniform dilation. For such a defor-
Sect. 44. Simple extension. 291 
mation we have 
D =Al, c = C-1 = -
1 1 C = c-1 = A.2 1 1 A2 ' ' 
Ic = 3 A2, Ilc = 3 A4, IIIc = A6, J 
(43.1) 
where 0 < A. < oo. An invariant necessary and sufficient condition that a pure 
homogeneaus deformation be a uniform dilation is 1 
(+rr=(~ IIY=III, (43.2) 
where the invariants are calculated from any one strain measure. This is so 
because (43.2) is necessary and sufficient that the strain measure have equal 
proper numbers. 
44. Simple extension. A pure homogeneaus deformation in which two but not 
three principal stretches are equal is called a simple extension. In a reetangular 
co-ordinate system whose axes are the principal axes of strain, we have 
BA. o o 
D = o BA. o 
o o A. 
ß2 A2 
c = c-1 = 0 
0 
O< B<oo, 
O< A.<oo, 
B=f=1, 
0 0 
0 
1 
A2 
c-1 =C = 
B2,12 0 
0 B2,12 
0 0 
0 
0 ' ,12 
IIIc= B4A_s. 
(44.1) 
The direction in which the stretch is A. is the axis of the extension, here taken 
as the axis of z and Z. The faetor B is related to the Iransverse contraction ratio v 
through the definition 
bx 1- BA 
v=-y = -A::.:.1 ' z 
1 B= A (1+v)-v. (44.2) 
The case B = 1, or v = - 1, which would lead to the results of Sect. 43, is excluded 
by definition. According as v > 0 or v < 0, the cross sections normal to the axis 
wane or wax as the length along the axis increases, while if v = 0, lengths normal 
to the axis are unchanged. The extension is isochoric if and only if B =A.-~, 
in which case (44.2) 2 becomes 
v = 1 ;:~~ = ~ + 0 (az) (44.3) 
as Oz-+0. 
Some authors 2 restriet the term simple extension to the case when v =0. 
Such a pure homogeneaus strain may be characterized by the necessary and 
sufficient conditions 3 IIE= IIIE= 0, the stretch being determined by IE= ,12-1. 
A corresponding invariant condition for the case when v does not necessarily 
vanish is more elaborate 4 : 
18 I II III- 4P III + J2 112- 4IP- 27IIJ2 = o, (44.4) 
1 A more elaborate but equivalent condition was given by SrGNORINI [1930, 6, § 10]. 2 E.g., LovE [1892, 8, § 3]. 3 CAFIERO [1906, 1, Chap. li, § 16]. 4 A more complicated but equivalent condition is given by SrGNORINI [1930, 6, § 10]. 
19* 
292 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 45. 
where the invariants may be calculated from any strain measure. To see that 
this condition is necessary and sufficient, recall that the matrix of any strain 
measure may be reduced to diagonal form by a suitable choice of co-ordinates 
(Sect. 28). From the definition of a strain measure (Sect. 32), forapure homogeneous deformation to be a simple extension it is necessary and sufficient that 
exactly two proper numbers of the strain measure be equal. But (44.4) 1 asserts 
that the discriminant of the cubic equation for the proper numbers vanishes, 
while (44.4) 2 asserts that the case of Sect. 43 is excluded. Q.E.D. 
lt is easy to consider a more general homogeneaus extension in which all three stretches 
are unequal. By the fundamental theorem of Sect. 27, however, any pure homogeneaus 
strain if referred to principal axes is of this form, and hence this case, being special only 
in choice of Co-ordinate system but not intrinsically, is of no interest. 
A deformation, not necessarily homogeneous, is a pure extension 1 if a certain triply 
orthogonal system of planes is deformed into itself. Referred to principal axes, such a deformation assumes the form x=f(X), y=g(Y), z=h(Z), and hence Ax=f', Ay=g', Az=h', 
whence follow formulae similar to (44.1). In particular, Illc= (f'g'h') 2 , and hence by 
obtaining the general solution of f' g' h' = 1 we conclude that an isochoric pure extension is 
necessarily homogeneous. 
Y,y 
/ 
~~----~--~~-------+--f--+~~ 
Z,z 
,-i---KY 
' I I L 
:r 
I 
I 
I 
I 
typical plane 
of shear 
Fig. 7. Simple shear. 
--typical axis 
of shear 
and rotation 
45. Simple shear. Consider a homogeneaus strain such that 
1. Two orthogonal families of parallel planes are individually preserved. 
2. The lines normal to one family remain normal to that family. 
3. The lines common to both families are not stretched. 
Such a homogeneaus strain is called a simple shear; the planes whose normals 
remain normals are called the planes of shear, while those of the second family 
are called the shearing planes (Fig. 7). It is obvious that the lines common to 
both families are individually preserved. The direction normal to a plane of 
shear is the axis of the shear. Since simple shear is the most important and 
instructive of all special deformations 2, we shall analyse it in detail. 
1 TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 42B]. 2 The concept of shear received currency relatively late in the history of continuum mechanics. While in 1770 EDLER had briefly and clearly explained and calculated not only 
the time rate of extension but also the time rate of shearing (for the results and reference, 
see Sects. 82-82A below). his work on this subject escaped notice until 1955. According to 
ToDHUNTERand PEARSON [1886, 4, § 726 and Appendix, Note A (6)], the first clear discussion 
of shear in reference to solids was given by VrcAT (1831). earlier remarks being due to YouNG 
(1807). The first analysis of finite shear was given by KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, §§ 169 to 
176]. SrGNORINI [1943, 6, ~ 12] approaches simple shear through a preliminary characterization of all deformations that leave a single plane point-by-point invariant. 
Sect. 45. Simple shear. 293 
Ignoring, as usual, a possible translation, we let the planes of shear be the 
planes Z =const; the shearing planes, Y = const. Hence z =Z, y = Y, and 
x=MX +KY +LZ. The condition that the Z-direction be preserved yields 
L = 0, while the condition that the stretch in the x-direction be 1 yields M = 1. 
Thus 
X=X +KY, y=Y, z=Z, 
1 K 0 
D= 0 1 0. 
0 0 1 
-=<K<=.l 
(45.1) 
The X= const planes are rotated rigidly about their lines of intersection with 
the Y = 0 plane through the angle of shearl, T, which is related to the amount, 
K, of the shear by T = arc tanK. (45.2) 
For definiteness, we suppose K >O henceforth. To visualize the shear, imagine 
that each of the planes Y = const be slid in the X-direction by an amount proportional to its distance from the Y = 0 plane. Such a displacement is easily 
approximated with a pack of cards. The stretch suffered by lines in the Y-direction is V 1 + K2 • Either from the definition of simple shear or from the fact that 
det D = 1 it is obvious that simple shear is an isochoric deformation. 
The point (- t K, 1, 0) is carried into the point ( + t K, 1, 0). Hence the 
length of the line whose slope angle is t n + arc tan t K in the Z = 0 plane in the 
undeformed material is unaltered. It follows that in any given simple shear 
there are two families of parallel planes that are transported rigidly, i.e., undeformed; both these are normal to the planes of shear, one set being the shearing 
planes themselves and the other the planes subtending the angle t n + arc tan t K 
from these planes. The Z-direction is of course a principal direction of strain. 
The other principal directions of strain are easily found, since by the symmetrical 
distribution of stretches and the extremal property of the principal directions 
(Sect. 27) it follows that the principal directions bisect the angles between the 
undeformed planes. In the undeformed body, one of these families of planes is 
inclined at the angle in+ t Are tan t K to the shearing planes, and in theseplanes 
lie the elements suffering greatest stretch. Hence and from (45.1) the magnitudes 
of the two principal stretches in the plane of shearing are easily calculated: 
.41=1 +tK2 +KV1 +tK2, l /.~=1/1.1=1 +tK2 -KV1+iK2. 
(45.3) 
For small shears we have /.1 =1 +tK +O(K2), /.2=1-tK +O(K2), while the 
principal axes approach the bisectors of the co-ordinate axes. 
The shear experienced by the pair of elements ( 1, 0, 0) and (0, 1, 0) is T, the 
angle of shear, but this is not the greatest shear. As follows from the general 
theory in Sect. 28, the greatest orthogonal shear is experienced by the elements 
bisecting the principal axes of strain in the plane of shear. One of these elements 
is inclined at angle tarctantK to the shearing planes. By applying (45.3) to 
(28.12) we conclude that the magnitude of the greatest shear, y, is given by 
tany = K V1 + tK2 • (45.4) 
Hence for small shears y =K +0 (K3) = r +0 (r3). 
1 Some authors (e.g. LovE [1892, 8, § 3]) use the termangle of shear for the angle through 
which an unstretched fibre in a plane of shear but not in a shearing plane is turned. As 
shown below, this angle is 2Arc tan t K = 2ff. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1 . 
294 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 45. 
The principal axes of strain in the planes of shear in the deformed material 
are the lines into which the two previously determined axes are deformed. They 
may be calculated by the same construction, starting from the deformed rather 
than the undeformed positioris of the lines whose length is unaltered. Hence the 
principal axis of greatest stretch in the deformed material subtends the angle 
± n-i arc tan !K from the shearing planes. The axis of rotation is parallel to 
the Z axis, and the angle of rotation is given by 
Y,y {) = arc tan i K = arc tan (i tan r). (45.5) 
For small shear, {)=ir+O(r:i)= 
iK +O(K3). In terms of the rotation, we may write (45.3) in the form 
A.1 =sec{) + tan {), } (45.6) · A.2 = sec{) - tan {). 
Hence 1 
The amount of shear is the ditference 
of the principal extensions. 
Fig. 8. Simple shear. 
A homogeneaus isochoric pure 
x,x strain is sometimes called a pure 
shear 2• The results just established 
are equivalent to resolution of a given simple shear into a pure shear followed 
by or preceded by a rotation about an axis normal to its plane. 
The features of shear just discussed are illustrated in Fig. 8, which is accurately 
drawn for a shear angle in. The portion of material shown is, beforedeformation, 
the intersection of a unit cube with a typical plane of shear; the particle Z selected for illustration is at the center of this area. 
The foregoing geometric treatment, which follows KELVIN and TAIT, is 
elegantly simple. For solution of mechanical problems, however, it is more convenient to have at hand the explicit formulae for various tensors introduced 
earlier in the chapter. The Cauchy and Green tensors and their reciprocals have 
the values 
C= 
1 -K o 
1+K2 o , 
1 
1 K o 
1+K2 o , c-1 = 
1+K2 K o 
1 0 ' 
. 1 
1+K2 -K o 
1 0 
1 1 
Ic = II0 = 3 + K2, IIIc = 1. 
(45.8) 
The proper numbers of all four deformation tensors are 1 and .l.i and ;.~ as given 
by (45.3). The unit proper vectors of C corresponding to these proper numbers, 
in the reverse order, are 
NJ,N2= vi+i(tK±V1+tK2)' N3=k, (45.9) 
2 + tK2 ± KV1 + !K2 
1 CAFIERO [1906, 1, Chap. II, § 16]. 
2 LOVE [1906, 5, §2]. 
Sect. 45. Simple shear. 295 
while the corresponding unit proper vectors of c are 
i+i(-tK±V1+tK2 ) 
nJ,n2= V , n3=k. 
z+tK2=t=KV1 +tK2 (45.10) 
Since we are employing the common frame, there is no need to distinguish the 
different types of components of R, and by substituting (45.9) and (45.10) into 
(37.2) we get tK --- 0 V1+tK2 v1 + tK2 
R = IIRMmll = -tK 1 (45.11) 
v1 +tK2 v1 +tK2 0 
0 0 1 
where the row index is M and the column index is m. Hence the axis of rotation 
is given by A = ± k, while by (37.21) the angle and measure of rotation are 
given by 
1 
cos{} =V , 1 +tK2 1\ - _1__ (1 - 1 ) 
- 2 v1 +tK2 . 
This result for {} agrees with (45.5) and also follows directly 
(45.10) and the fact that cos {} =nf N1M =nf N2M. 
By (45.8), for the strain tensors E and e we have 
0 
e= 
-!K 0 
--!K2 0 , 
0 
E = . tK2 ~ , 0 -!K 0 l 
le =-IE = 2 Ile = 2 IIE =--! K2 , 
while for the tensors of elongation we have 
o !K o 
0 0 
0 
(45.12) 
from (45.9) and 
(45.13) 
(45.14) 
Hence, as is obvious, the elongations of elements in the co-ordinate directions 
are a11 zero. The directions of elements suffering greatest and least elongation 
lie in the plane of shear and are inclined at angle i-n to the shearing planes, the 
extremal elongations being ±-! K. The axial vectors of mean rotation are given by 
r = ii = -! curl u = - -! K k = - tan {} k. (45.15) 
Of course this vector and the axis A are parallel, but only for small rotation does 
the magnitude of this vector equal the angle of rotation (45.5). This result is to 
be Contrasted with the formula for the cross of R: 
-!Rx =-sin{}k, (45.16) 
which follows from the general formula (37.19) 4 and the fact that we may choose 
- k as the axis. 
The concept of simple shear is not invariant, since it singles out a particular 
rotation. We may approach an invariant characterization as follows: A homogeneous isochoric strain may be regarded as simple shear followed by or preceded 
296 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
by a rotation about the axis of shear if and only ifl 
! 0 = II0 ; 
Sect. 46. 
(45.17) 
equivalently, if and only if it is plane. The amount of shear is Vro- 3. The equivalence of the two conditions follows from (42.4). The theorem itself isgeometrically obvious. For an algebraic proof, we need only notice that in any plane iso~ 
choric strain, as was remarked in Sect. 41, we have Ä1 = 1/.1.2 , and hence by (45 .6) 
and (45.5) follow uniquely determined values of {} and K. 
The foregoing theorem is particularly useful when applied to deformations 
which arenot homogeneous, as follows: At a point where III0 =1 and I0 =II0 , 
the measures of strain and rotation have the same values as for a simple shear of 
amount K = VIo __:::-3, in the plane normal to the principal direction whose stretch is 1. 
46. Composition of shears and other special homogeneous strains. By ( 17.11), 
a succession of homogeneaus strains may be regarded as a single homogeneaus 
strain, but the result depends on the order in which the strains are taken, as 
follows from (17.12). However, no such rule as (17.11) holds when the matrices D 
are restricted to special subclasses such as pure strains, simple extensions, or 
simple shears. That is, while homogeneaus strains constitute a group, none of 
the previously defined special types, apart from uniform dilation, form subgroups. 
This fact suggests that these special deformations may be used to build up a 
general homogeneaus deformation. Two resolutions of this kind are stated now 
without proof2: 
1. Any homogeneaus strain may be produced by the succession of a simple 
shear, a simple extension (without transverse contraction) normal to the plane 
of shear, a uniform dilation, and a rotation. 
2. Any homogeneaus strain may be produced by the succession of three simple 
shears in mutually perpendicular planes, a uniform dilation, and a rotation. 
As is indicated by No. 2, the result of two successive shears will in general 
be complicated 3 • However, in the special cases when the planes of the two shears 
are perpendicular and one or two families of planes are individually preserved 
in each deformation, the formulae aresimple enough tobe worth noting. First 4, 
if both the Y = const and the Z = const planes are preserved, we get 
D= 0 
1 K
1 
1 K
0 
2 
= 0 
1 K
1 
1 
0 
0 · 010, 
1 0 K2 l 
001 001 001 
=Dl·Dz =Dz·Dl. 
(46.1) 
Second 5, if only the Y = const planes are individually preserved, it follows that 
1 Kl 0 1 Kl 0 
D= 0 1 0 0 1 0 
0 K2 1 0 0 1 (46.2) 
=Dl·Dz =Dz ·Dl. 
I LovE [1892, 8, § 7]. 2 The proofs are easy from geometrical considerations (cf. KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, 
§§ 178-185]) or by theorems on the factorization of matrices. An analysis of shears into 
products of reflections has been given by WILSON [1907, 8]. 
3 Cf. LovE [1892, 8, Note AJ. 
• E. and F. CosSERAT [1896, 1, § 7]. 6 TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 42G]. 
Sect. 47. Generalized shear. 
For these two cases we get, respectively, 
1 K 1 K 2 1 
C= 1 +K~ K 1 K 2 , 
1 +K~ 
Hence in both cases 
K 1 0 
1 +K~+Kj K2 
1 
I0 = II 0 = 3 + K~ + K~, III0 = 1 . 
297 
(46.3) 
(46.4) 
By the criterion given at the end of Sect. 45, each of these composite shears may 
be regarded as a simple shear of amountl K = V K~ + K~. The principal axes of 
the resultant shear are of course different in the two cases. The planes of shearing 
are the planes normal to the proper vectors corresponding to the proper number 1. 
For the former, this gives K2Y=K1 Z; for the latter, K2 X=K1 Z. 
47. Generalized shear. In the deformations 2 
X= X f(Y) + g(Y), y = h(Y), z=k(Z)+l(Y), (47.1) 
the planes Y =const areslidparallel to each other, but the direction and amount 
of the slide varies arbitrarily from plane to plane. At the same time, there are 
stretches in the X, Y, and Z directions; in particular, Äx=f(Y) and Äz=k'(Z) = 
k'(k-1(z-l(YJ)), so that in a given plane Y = const the stretch Äz depends only 
on z, and the stretch Äx is constant. This dass of deformations reduces to a 
special kind of generalized plane strain if l (Y) = 0; it includes simple extension, 
simple shear, and pure shear as special cases. We readily find that 
(Xf' + g') I 0 
C= (Xf'+g')2+h' 2+l' 2 k'l' 
k'2 
f2 + (X I g I'+ g't (X I g I'+ g') h' (X I g I'+ g') l' 
h'2 
Ic = f2 + h' 2 + k'2 + l'2 + (X f' + g')2' 
IIc = f2(h'2 + k'2 + ['2) + k'2 [(X f' + g')2 + h'2J, 
IIIc = f2h'2k'2. 
h' l' 
l'2 + k'2 (47.2) 
Hence such a deformation is isochoric if and only if k' =const =Ä, say, while 
f(Y)h'(Y) =1/J... 
Another generalization of simple shear, given by 
x=X+f(Y), y=Y+g(Z), z=Z+h(X), (47.3) 
1 For the former case, this was observed by LovE [1892, 8, § 10(iv)]. 
2 This class of deformations combines the features of (46.2) and of a class considered by 
ADKINS [1955, J, § 3]. 
298 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 48. 
may be regarded as the succession of three variable shears in mutually perpendicular planes1 . Forthis case we get 
1 + h' 2 !' h' 1 + /' 2 !' h' 
c = 1 + f' 2 g' c-1 = 1 + g' 2 g' 
1 +g'2, 1 + h' 2 
Ic = 3 + !' 2 + g' 2 + h' 2' 
IIc = 3 + !' 2 + g' 2 + h' 2 + !' 2 g' 2 + g' 2 h' 2 + h' 2 !' 2, 
IIIc = (1 + /' g' h') 2 • 
(47.4) 
Thus the deformation (47.3) is isochoric if and only if at least one of the functions 
f, g, h reduces to a constant; that is, if and only if at least one of the three constituent shears is a simple shear. By (45.17), it is locally a simple shear if and 
only if at least two of the three constituent shears are simple shears. 
SrGNORINI 2 has determined the most general deformation in which all components of E 
except a single shear component vanish. 
48. Simple torsion. When a cylinder is twisted uniformly along its length, 
we get the isochoric deformation 
r=R, 0=8+KZ, z=Z, (48.1) 
where R, 8, Z and r, (), z are cylindrical polar co-ordinates referred to the same 
system. Torsion deserves detailed analysis because it is the most important 
simple deformation which is neither a homogeneaus strain nor a plane strain. 
The constant K is the twist per unit length. Since G11 = 1, G2 2 = R2; G33 = 1, 
g11 =1, g22 =r2, g33 =1, while all other components GMP and gmp vanish, from 
(26.2h and (29.1) 2 we get 
IIC1!11 = ~ ~ ~ ll~ tll = ~ 1 + 2 ~ • l 
0 K R2 1 + K2 R2 0 K r2 1 (48.2) 
10 = Ilc = 3 + K2 R2 , III0 = 1 . 
The physical components of C and c are precisely equal to their counterparts 
for simple shear as given by (45.8), provided we take the plane of shear as the 
tangent plane to the cylinder R = const and the shearing planes as the planes 
Z = const, at the same time replacing K by KR. In other words, simple torsion 
may be regarded as effecting on each cylinder R = const, when cut along a 
generator and developed upon a plane, a simple shear of magnitude KR. Thus a 
complete analysis of torsion may be read off from the results obtained in Sect. 45. 
The formulae so gotten for R and other tensors are expressed in terms of physical 
components rather than tensor components. The angle of rotation is given by 
{} = arc tan i KR, (48.3) 
the principal stretches are 1, sec{} + tan {}, sec{} - tan {}, etc. 
1 This is not the succession of the three shears 
X 1 =X+f(Y) X 2 =X1 x=X2 
Y, = Y Y2 = Y1 + g (Z1 ) y = Y2 
Z 1 =Z Z2 =Z1 z=Z2 +h(X2), 
their composition being the isochoric deformation x = X+ f ( Y), y = Y + g (Z), z = Z + 
h(X + /(Y)). 2 [1943, 6, ~ 30]. 
Sect. 49. Generalized torsion, shear, and inflation of a circular cylinder. 299 
49. Generalized torsion, shear, and inflation of a circular cylinder. A family 
of deformations of torsional type is given by1 
r =f(R), () = g(@) + h(R) k(Z), z =l(Z) +m(@) +n(R), (49.1) 
where the co-ordinates are chosen as in Sect. 48. If this deformation is considered 
throughout an entire cylinder, rather than merely a sector, g and m must be periodic 
of period 2 n. The function f represents a radial expansion of the cylinders 
R = const; g, an annular expansion; k, a torsion of magnitude varying from 
cylinder to cylinder, as moderated by h; l, an extension along the axis; m, a 
shearing of the generators of the cylinders; and n, a shearing of the cylinders 
along their generators. We readily calculate 
JJCEJI = 
I' 2 + f2 h' 2 k2 + n' 2 f2 g' h' k + m' n' 
(12 g' h' k + m' n')jR2 (12 g' 2 + m' 2)jR2 
/ 2 h' k' h k + l' n' / 2 g' h k' + l' m' 
f'2 y2 I' h' k 
f2 h' k' h k + l' n' 
(12 g' h k' + l' m')jR2 , 
f2h2k'2 + l'2 
f'n' 
f'h'k r2(h'2k2+g'2jR2+h2k'2) 
f' n' r 2 (g' m'jR2 + h k' l' + h' k n') 
g' m'jR2 + h k' l' + h' k n' , 
l'2 + m'2jR2 + n'2 
Ic = f2(h'2k2 + g'2jR2 + h2k'2) + f'2 + l'2 + m'2jR2 + n'2, 
II0 = f2 [(h k' n'- h' k l')2 + {(h k' m'- g' l') 2 + (g' n'- m' k h') 2}jR2] + 
+I' 2 [f2 h2 k' 2 + l' 2 + (12 g' 2 + m' 2)jR2, 
III0 = / 2 /' 2 (g' l'- m' h k') 2jR2 • 
(49.2) 
To find the isochoric subdass of these deformations, we set IIIc= 1 and solve the 
functional differential equation so obtained. If h = const, the result is 
r= VAR2 + B, () = ce + DZ, z = Ef) + FZ + n(R), A (CF- DE) = ± 1; (49.3) 
if h' g' k' l' m' oj= 0, the result is ' ~V I ii~) ':~- + B 
()=Cf)+ K + h(R) (DZ + L). 
z = E f) + F Z + n (R), 
ACF=±G, 
if h' =I= 0, g' = 0, the result is 
ADE= 'f1; 
(49.4) 
, ~V 1 2~:,~:-: ~. \ (49.5) 
O=K+h(R)(DZ+~). z=l(Z)+EfJ+n(R); 
if h' =I= 0, l' =I= 0, the result is 
r= JR -~+B, 
2Avdv l 
() = g(fJ) + h(R) (D~ + L), z = Ef) + n(R); 
(49.6) 
1 This family includes one introduced by ERICKSEN and RrvLIN [1954, 6, §§ 8-10]. 
300 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 50. 
if h' =!= 0, m' = 0, the result is 
r = YAR2+ B, 
if h' =!= 0, k' = 0, the result is 
(J = C @ + h (R) k (Z), z=FZ + n(R); 
o = ce + h(R), z = FZ + m(@) + n(R), 
(49.7) 
(49.8) 
where in all cases insignificant additive constants have been dropped. 
Numerous interesting cases are included, of which we mention but a few. If A < o, r 
is a decreasing function of R in (49.3h; such deformations represent the eversion of a 
hollow cylinder. For a: cylinder which is subjected first to longitudinal stretch Ä and then 
to twist T, put A =Ä-1, B=O, C= 1, D=rfÄ, E=O, F=Ä, n=O. If A =00 f(2nK2 ), 
C = 2nf00 , F = K2, B = D = E = n = 0, the deformation represents the closing of a circular 
cylindrical shell of wedge angle @0 so as to form a complete cylinder, furnishing an example 
of the distorsioni introduced by WEINGARTEN and VoLTERRA1• lf A = C =F = 1, B = D = 
E = 0, then (49.2) reduces to the forms included in (45.8), up to a permutation of co-ordinates, 
if K is replaced by n'. Thus the result of a shearing along the generators is locally the same 
as a simple shear of amount n' in the planes e = const. A similar remark holds for the case 
f' = g' = l' = 1, k = 1, m = n = 0, except that physical components must be used, the amount 
of shear is rh', and the planes of shearing are the Z = const planes. 
y 50. Bending of a block into a cyL __ 
I 
I 
I 
lindrical wedge. As our first example 
of the advantage of the use of different co-ordinate systems at X and 
~. we consider the deformation 2 
r =f(X), 
z = h(Z), 
O = g(Y),} (50.1) 
where for the most applications it is L-___ ......... _ _,_ ___ ..J....I __ ..J...._ ____ % desirable, but not necessary, to reFig. 9. Bending of a block. gard the reetangular Cartesian X, Y, 
Z system and the cylindrical polar 
r, 0, z system as having a common origin and a common z-Z axis. The family 
of planes Z = const is preserved; the Y = const planes are deformed into planes 
intersecting along the z axis; the planes X= const are deformed into concentric 
circular cylinders whose axis is the Z-z axis. The deformation is most easily 
visualized by restricting attention to a block whose faces are X, Y, Z planes 
and which does not include the origin (Fig. 9). 
Since GKM = (jKM, while g11 = g33 = 1, g22 = r 2, gkm = 0 if k=l=m, by straighttorward calculation from (26.2} 2 and (29.1h we get 
IJc~ll =IIC~II = 
/' 2 0 0 
r2g'2 0 
h'2 
Ic = f'2 + r2g'2 + h'2, Ilc = f'2h'2 + r2g'2(f'2 + h'2), 
Illc = r2 I' 2 g' 2 h' 2. 
(50.2) 
To interpret the formulae just obtained, note that corresponding components 
of c-1 and C have the same numerical values for a given particle; of course, if 
we regard c-1 as a function of ~ and C as a function of X, the functions are different. For example, i: = C~, but if we take c-1 as a function of ~ and C as a 
function of X, we have c1/ = [ r g' (g-1 (0)) ]2 = C~ = [/(X) g' (Y) ]2. 
1 [1901, 15]; [1905, 6]. 
2 We follow TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 421]. SIGNORINI [1943, 6, § 29] approaches the 
case z = Z through conditions of integrability for the pure strain. 
Sect. 51. Bending of a block into a wedge. 301 
Since (50.2) is in diagonal form, the directions of the co-ordinate curves bothat 
X and ~ are principal directions of strain, and the principal stretches are f', rg', h'. 
The contravariant components of the unit proper vectors, expressed in the 
appropriate co-ordinates, are given by 
N 1 = (1, 0, 0), 
n 1 =(1,0,0), 
whence follows by (37.2h 
N 2 = (0, 1, o), 
n2 = (o, : o), 
1 0 0 
r-1 0 
1 
N 3 = (0, 0, 1), l 
n3 = (0, 0, 1), (50. 3) 
(50.4) 
To calculate Rk,,. from this result by the formula Rkm = g~ RkK• we need the 
values of the shifter gf, given by (App. 17.2) for the case when the co-ordinate 
systems at X and at ~ have a common origin and a common Z-z axis. Hence 
follows 
cos () - r sin () 0 
IIRk mll = + sin () cos () 0 , 
0 0 1 
so that the axis of rotation is the z axis, and by (37.21) we get 
cos f} = cos () , or f} = ± () : 
(50.5) 
(50.6) 
Apart from a possible reflection, the angle of rotation is the azimuth angle. The 
result is obvious, but we have given the foregoing formulae in illustration of the 
general apparatus of Sect. 37. 
The isochoric subdass of (50.1) is 
r=V2AX+B, O=CY, z=DZ, ACD=±1, (50.7) 
where two constants of integration have been adjusted so as to center the deformed block with respect to the co-ordinates at X. 
If we wish to allow shearing of the cylindrical surfaces, we may generalize (50.1) by 
resulting in 
1n~11= 
r = f(X), 0 = g(Y) + k(X). z = h(Z) + l(X). 
f'2 y2 I' k' f'l' f'2 + f2 k'2 + 1'2 f2g' k' 
I' k' y2 (g'2 + k'2) k'l' IIC~II= f2g'2 
f'l' r2k' l' h'2 + 1'2 
Ic= f'2 + r2 (g'2 + k'2) + h'2 + 1'2, 
Ilc= f'2h'2+ r2[g'2(f'2+ h'2+ 1'2) + h'2k'2], 
IIIc = r2 f'2 g'2 h'2. 
(50.8) 
h'l' 
0 
h'2 
(50.9) 
The isochoric subdass of these deformations is obtained by adding to the second members 
of (50.7) the functions 0, k(X), l(X). 
51. Bending of a block into a spherical wedge. If we let the co-ordinates 
at ~ be spherical polar, rp being the azimuth angle, we get in analogy to (50.8) 
r=f(X), O=g(Y)+k(X), rp=h(Z)+l(X). (51.1) 
302 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 52. 
Analogaus calculations yield 
!' 2 y2 !' k' y2 sin2 () !' l' 
llc~ll = I' k' Y2 (g' 2 + k' 2) r2 sin2 () k' l' 
f' l' r2 k' l' r2 sin2 () (h' 2 + l' 2) 
f' 2 + r2k' 2 + r2sin2 () l' 2 r2g' k' r2sin2 () h' l' 
IIC~il = r2g'2 (51.2) 
Ic = f'2 + r2 (g' 2 + k' 2) + y2 sin2 () (h' 2 + l' 2), 
IIc = r4 sin2 () (g' 2 h' 2 + h' 2 k' 2 + g' 2l' 2) + y2 sin2 () h' 2 !' 2 + y2 !' 2 g' 2, 
IIIc = r4sin2() j'2g'2h'2. 
When the shearing functions k and l vanish, the co-ordinate axes are principal 
axes of strain, and Counterparts of the results at the beginning of Sect. 50 are 
easily obtained. 
For the isochoric case, it is easy to show that h' and k must be constants. 
Without loss of generality we can then set k = 0, h' = H, and obtain 
r=yAX+B, 3 
cos () = ± A H Y + C, cp = HZ + l (X). (51.3) 
52. Inflation, torsion, and shear of a sphere. Let the co-ordinates at x and 
at X be spherical polar, and suppose 
Then 
r = f(R), () = g(@) + h(R) k((/J), cp = l((/J). 
j'2 r 2 I' h' k 
I' 2 + y2 h' 2 k2 r2g' h' k 
r2 g' h' k y2 g'2 
r2hh' k k' 
r2g' hk' 
0 
2 . 2 () 
_! sm -- h k' l' 
R 2sin2EJ 
2 . 2 () 
~m-~l'2 
R2 sin2EJ 
IIC~il= R2 R2 R2 
r2 h h' k k' r2 g' hk' r2 h2 k'2 + r2 sin2 () 1'2 ----
R 2sin2EJ R2 sin2 EJ R2 sin2EJ 
2 '2 2(h2k'2+ . 2 01'2) I = /'2 + r2h'2k2 + r _!_ . + _!'_ -~srll __ C R 2 R 2sin2EJ ' 
r2 j'2 g'2 r2 [1'2 sin2 () (1'2 + r2 {h'2 k2 + g'2fR2}) + j'2 h2 k'2] 
IIc = R2 + R2sin2EJ ' 
4 . 2 () 
III = __"_s~ /'2 '2l'2. 0 R4sin2EJ g 
(52.1) 
(52.2) 
The isochoric subdass in general does not appear to be easy to determine 
unless h and k are constants. Taking them as zero yields for the isochoric subdass 
( cos e) () = ± arc cos - A L , (52.3) 
Sects. 53, 54. Small principal extensions. 303 
where insignificant constants have been dropped. Forthis subclass, as also more 
generally whenever h and k are constants, the co-ordinate directions are principal 
axes of strain. Even though the two sets of co-ordinate surfaces coincide, it does 
not then follow that the deformation is a pure strain. In fact, it is evident that 
the principal axes of strain experience non-zero rotation unless 
Since f may be a decreasing function of R, eversion of a spherical shell is included as a special case in (52.1) and (52.3). 
e) Small deformation 1• 
53. The meaning of "small ". The looseness with which the term "small" 
is often used has led to much confusion and some error. In this work, unless 
the contrary is stated explicitly, by "A is small when B is small" we mean 
"B--+0 implies A--+0". By 
"A(yl,y2, ... ,y")~B(y ,y , ... ,y") when Y1 , ••• ,y" aresmall" (53.1) 
we mean "A and B are analytic functions of y1 , ••• ,y" at y1 = y2 = · · · = y" = 0, 
and the expansions for A and Bin powers of the Yk have the same non-identically 
zero leading terms ". (As is weil known, successive applications of this definition 
may lead to seemingly inconsistent results 2.) 
While a more general definition could easily be formulated, this one suffices 
for unequivocal and correct statements of results of the type used by authors 
who neglect terms because they are "small ". 
We must warn the reader however, that it is unjustified to assume that the sequences 
of deformations standing behind the Iimit processes used in the following purely kinematical 
statements are compatible with any particular theory of continuous bodies. For example, 
we sometimes consider extension and rotation as independently variable, but in any particular 
theory of bodies a sequence of deformations is produced by a sequence of Ioads, and whether 
it is possible to choose the Iatter in such a way as to Ieave the Iocal rotation fixed but vary 
the extensions is du bious. 
It does not seem possible to give a precise meaning to the concept of "numerically small" 
often encountered in physical works. For example, if by "x <1" Wl" agree to mean "x ~ w- 6 ", 
then certainly 106 • w- 6 is not small. However, when this concept of smallness is used, the 
users invariably manipulate it in a fashion justified only if the sum of any finite number 
of small quantities is small, and a constant multiple of any small quantity is small. 
54. Small principal extensions 3• When the three principal extensions Oa are 
small, by (31.4) we have (54.1) 
From (30.8) and (App. 39.11) it follows that every one of the components Ex M 
and ekm is small. By (26.4) and (31.1), the extension in every direction is small, 
1 We do not have space to include the !arge body of results on infinitesimal deformation 
of surfaces. 
2 For example, if I= y3 and g = y, I and g are small when y is small, and also y is small 
if either 1 or g is small. However, if we set 
we obtain 
V ~ 13 + I g2 + I g3 = y5 + y6 + y9' 
v ""' Ia = y9 when g is small 
""' 1 g2 + 1 ga = y5 + y6 when 1 is small 
""' Ia + 1 g2 = y5 + y9 when both I and g are small 
""' y5 when y is small. 
Thus to assume both I and g small is not the same thing as to assume y small. 
3 While the results of this section are due to CAUCHY [1827, 2], he did not distinguish 
the case considered here from the more restricitve one considered in Sect. 56. 
304 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Ciassica! Fie!d Theories. Sect. 54-
and (54.2) 
From (26.9) and (31.1) we see that the shears are small, and after some manipulation we derive the formula 
r. R; 2EKM __ . cosece --(EKK + EMM)cote K=j=M. (54-3) KM VgK KWM M KM gKK gMM KM• 
As we have said, from (54.1) it follows that the shears are small. It would not be sufficient 
to replace (54.1) by the assumption that the extensions in some non-principal orthogonal 
triad of directions are small. To see this, note that by (26.5) and (31.1) the vanishing of the 
extensions in three orthogonal directions yields lE= 0 but imposes no bounds on IIE and 
IIIE. Hence the t5a may be arbitrarily !arge. To describe the case considered in this section 
without reference to the principal directions we should have to speak of small extensions and 
shears. 
For an orthogonal system of co-ordinates at X it follows that E~ R! the extension in the XI direction, 2 (yg11 /yg;-2 ) E~ R! the shear of the XI and X2 directions. In other words, for the physical components E<K M) we have 
L1n tri2 tri3 
IIE<KM>IIR; Ll22 tr23 (54.4) 
L133 
In an orthogonal co-ordinate system, the physical components of E for small extensions equal the corresponding extensions and halves of the shears. The dual formula holds for e, but there is in general no simple relation between the two 
sets of extensions and shears. 
From (54.1), (31.S)s and (31.5h we getl 
(54. 5) 
For small extensions, the first invariants of E and e equal the relative increment 
of volume. The fundamental identities (30.2) now assume the forms 
(54.6) 
while the fundamental lemma of Sect. 30 may be expressed thus: Any scalar 
function of E equals the same scalar function of e. Also from (30.8) follows 2 
(54.7) 
It is only in the case of small extensions that the tensors E and e are convenient measures of strain. 
From (31.1) follows a formula which in itself includes much of what we have 
just derived: Ca R! 1 + E. (54.8) 
By (3 7.15) we now get simple expressions for the measures of rotation and elongation: 
RKM R; R[KM] + R[Kp EMJP• l 
EKM R; R(KM) + R(Kp EM)P- gKM• 
RKM R; b~ + RKM + E~- E~- Efr UKp, 
(54.9) 
1 CAUCHY [1827, 2, Eq. (33)]. 2 Conditions of compatibility (Sect. 34) appropriate to the case of small extension have 
been discussed by CASTOLDI [1954, 2]. 
Sect. 56. Small extensions and small rotation. 305 
where we ha ve retained terms of order 1 in the extensions. If we revert to our 
usual usage of "small ", we get simply 
-1 
RKM R:; b~ + u~M• RKM R:; b~- u~M· l (54.10) 
Note that for thesesimple formulae tobe true, the rotations need not be small. 
E.g., in any rigid rotation (54.10) holds, with R:; replaced by =. 
55. Small rotation1. The term "small rotation" shall refer to the case when 
the rotation-& of every element is small. By (35-3) follows 2 
e=b-!(1 +b)-&2 +(1 +b)O(-ß-4). (55 .1) 
Also, from (36.7) and (36.8) it follows that Tx issmalland is given by 
-RYZ 
Tx R:; (55.2) 
V(1 +Eyy) (1 +Ezz) -Elz . 
Consequently R is small when the rotation is small. By the results of Sect. 38, 
then, a small potential deformation is a pure strain; alternatively: For the case 
of small rotation, a necessary and sulficient condition for pure strain is ii = 0. 
From (37.17) follows 
from which is plain the vectorial character of small rotations: 
1RKP2RP M R:; b~ + eKMP (-ß-1 Af + ß-2 A:). 
(55.3) 
(55.4) 
Also, comparison of (55.3) 1 with (55.3) 2 shows that the rotation tensor R is 
completely characterized by its cross; writing R==!Rx, we have 
(55.5) 
Extending the convention of Sect. 36, we now use the same symbol R to denote 
at will either the rotation tensor or its cross; the context will show which one is 
intended. 
56. Small extensions and small rotation. When both the rotations and the 
extensions are small, we may combine the results of the last two sections. From 
(55.1) it follows that the elongations are small, and hence the components ifKM 
are small. By (55.2) and (36.12) we get 
(56.1) 
For small extension and rotation, the length of the profection of the vector R upon 
a given direction is the mean rotation about that direction3• While ii is a small 
1 That it is possible in interesting cases of deformation for the rotation to be numerically 
!arge when the extension is numerically small was noticed by ST. VENANT [1844, 3] [1847, 3], 
who mentioned the following examples: a thin sheet may be bent back so that its two ends 
touch, a long slender shaft may be twisted through several diameters. Cf. PoiNCARE [ 1892, 
11, § 2]. ALMANSI [1917, 1, § 3], KAPPUS [1939, 11, § 4, footnote]. It is possible to exhibit 
families of such deformations in which E--*0 while E remains non-zero. See [1944, 4], where 
CISOTTI, using a previously derived result [1932, 2], has calculated E for the case of a rigid 
displacement, when E = 0. Cf. also CAsToLm [1954, 3]. 
2 NovozHILOV [1948, 18, Eq. (1.110)]. 3 CAUCHY [1841, 1, Ths. 5. 6, 7]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 20 
)06 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 57. 
vector representing mean rotations and R as given by (55.5) is a small vector 
representing rotation of the axes of strain, the two vectors are distinct unless 
further assumptions are made. 
Recalling our definition of "small" in Sect. 53, we see that in the present 
case {31.10) reduces to 1 
Efr ~ Efr +t (- EKP RMP- RKP EMP + RKP RMp), (56.2) . 
while (55.1) becomes 
(56.)) 
57. Small displacement gradients. If the extensions and rotations are small, 
it follows that the gradients uK;M are small. However, according to the definition 
in Sect. 53, to suppose conversely that the uK;M aresmall is not the same thing. 
In fact, if we retain only terms of lowest order in expansions in powers of the 
uK;M we get not only all the results of Sects. 54 to 56 but also in place of (56.2) 
simply 2 
E~E. e~e: (57.1) 
When the displacement gradients are small, the strain and elongation tensors are 
equal, their physical components being related to the extensions and shears by (54.4). 
By observing (57.1) and (56.1), we see that theinvariant identity 
(57.2) 
now expresses an additive decomposition of any displacement into a pure strain 
and a mean rotation. This is Cauchy's 'l"esolution of a displacement with 
small gradients 3 . For an alternative interpretation based on the rotation 
of the principal axes, we may calculate the rotation R from {54.9) 3 , by (57.1) 
now obtaining 4 
-1 
RKM ~ bfr + RKM• Rkm ~ b~- ykm• (57.)) 
Hence 
(57.4) 
This last equation states that the axis of rotation is a unit vector in the direction 
of R, i.e., A K = ± RKJR. If we attempt to calculate the angle of rotation from 
(57.)), we get only 0. Instead, we go back to (54.9) 3 , obtaining 
where the last step follows by {31.10). By {)7.21) 2 and (36.12) we get 
{}= ±R: 
(57.5) 
(57.6) 
When the displacement gradients are small, the vector R points along the axis of 
rotation and is of magnitude equal to the angle of rotation, in radians 5• 
1 We do not follow the argument of NovozHILOV [1948, 18, § 14], according to which 
the two terms with minus signs are dropped. We note also that NovozHrLov's equation 
(1.105) is false. 2 CAUCHY [1827, 2, Eq. (41)]. 3 Implied by [1841, J, Part II], but not explicitly stated. 4 To obtain (54.10)3, 4 , we held the rotation fixed and Iet the extensions approach zero. 
The apparently contradictory formula (57.3) results from the Iimit UK;M--*0, implyingthat 
both the extensions and the rotations approach zero tagether and at certain relative rates 
implied by their relation to the quantities uK;M· This illustrates the remarks in Sect. 531. 
5 E. and F. CossERAT [1896, 1, § 11]. Other proofs are given by BoussrNESQ [1912, 1, 
§§ 9-10) and ÜDONE [1933, 9]. 
Sect. 57. Small displacerr:ent gradients. )07 
A different interpretation of ii, due to CAUCHY1, is more conveniently presented in Sect. 86. 
Also by (5 7.1) and (34.8) it follows at once 2 that when the displacement gradients 
are small, the conditions of compatibility assume ST. VENANT's form: 
(5 7.7) 
These equations possess an extensive literature 3 • 
Since the co-ordinates at X and at x are independently selected, no simple 
relation between E and e can be expected. From (19.5), however, we conclude 
that if the uk;m are small, so are the uK;M• and conversely, and moreover 
(57.8) 
That is, when the displacement gradients are small, uk; m and uK; M are components 
of the same tensor at x and at X, respectively, and consequently the same holds 
ot ii and r, il ande: 
(5 7.9) 
By (57.1), analogaus relations hold between the RKM and the Rkm• the EKM 
and the ekm· As a corollary, it follows that jor small displacement gradients, 
corresponding components of R + 1, R, and r, and of E, e, E, ande in the common 
frame are numerically equal: 
1+Rxx~1+Rxx~Rxx~rxx, l 
Rxy ~ R"Y ~ !!xY ~._r"Y, ... , 
Exx ~ e""~ Exx ~ e"", 
Exy ~ exy ~ Exy ~ exy> •.•• 
(57.10) 
For a curvilinear co-ordinate system, no such result as (57.10) holds without 
further assumptions. 
1 [1841, 1, Ths. S-9]. 2 It follows, that is, if we add to our definition of "small" in Sect. 53 the convention 
that the derivative of a small quantity is small. Such a convention may be achieved by restricting all comparisons to specially selected sequences of functions, e.g. by a perturbation 
series such as that of Sect. 59. While we follow the custom of writers on elasticity in presenting the conditions of compatibility in this way, we feel compelled to point out that we 
do not share the confidence many authors put in these formal procedures. The mathematical 
questions at issue are these. Given a family of displacement vectors Bu depending upon a parameter Bin such a way that BuK;M-+0 as B-+0, isittrue that R}fkPQ~ö~:Äf(j~~ ERT;SU 
as B-+ 0? Conversely, if E KM satisfies (34.8), Iet u be the corresponding displacement; then 
does there exist a family Bu which for each B satisfies (34.4) and also satisfies Bu~u as 
B-+0? 
CASTOLDI [ 1954, 2] derives forms of the conditions of compatibility for the case of small 
extensions and for the case of small extensions with small gradients of the extensions. For 
the latter case he obtains precisely (57-7); hence there is a vector v suchthat EKM= V(K;M), 
and he finds that this vector v is either the displacement vectoru or eise v K = uK + t (uM uM); K. 3 They were given by KIRcHHOFF [1859, 2, §§ 1-2], but without a clear statement of 
their meaning, which was first explained by ST. VENANT [1864, 3, § 32]. The classical arguments do not deal with the question raised in the preceding footnote but in fact concern the 
necessity and sufficiency of (34.8) as conditions on the e!ongation tensor E; cf. BoussrNESQ 
[1871, 2, §I], KIRCHHOFF [1876, 2, Vor!. 27, § 4], BELTRAMI [1886, 1, Note at end] [1889, 2], 
FADOVA [1889, 7], E. and F. CossERAT [1896, 1, § 13], CESARO [1906, 2], VaLTERRA [1907, 
7, Chap. I]. Explicit forms of (57-7) in curvilinear Co-ordinates are given by OngvrsT [1937, 8] 
and VLASOV [1944, 12]. 
20* 
308 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 58. 
The foregoing theorem is a special case of a general principle for replacement 
of the derivatives ojoXK by the derivatives ojoxk. By (19.4) we have in general 
(57.11) 
Hence if the displacement gradients are small, ofjoXK and ofjoxk are components 
of the same quantity at X and at x: 
(57.12) 
The most important property of the case of small displacement gradients 
is the superposability of a succession of strains and rotations. Beginning with 
strain, we consider first the more general case analysed in Sect. 39, in which an 
arbitrary deformation from X to X is followed by a second from X to x, yielding 
the exact formula (39.6). When the second displacement has small gradients, 
it is immediate from (39.6) 3 and (57.1) thatl 
(57.13) 
If the gradients of the first displacement are small, independently of those of 
the second, by (39.7) follows 
(57.14) 
while if the gradients of both displacements, taken together, are small, we get 
(57.15) 
Analogaus formulae for the mean rotation R follow easily, and we may assert 
Cauchy's superposition theorem2 : In the common frame, the extensions, shears, 
and mean rotations corresponding to the succession of two displacements whose 
gradients are small may be obtained by adding tagether the extensions, shears, and 
mean rotations corresponding to each individual displacement. 
58. Small displacement. If we refer the co-ordinates at x and X to the same 
system (e.g., the common frame), for continuous f we have 
(58.1) 
for small displacements, the dimensionless error being of the order uk (log f) k. 
That is, for small displacement, any continuous function of x may be taken as the 
same function of X, and conversely, provided the co-ordinate systems at x and X 
be the same 3. 
For small displacement we have 
(58.2) 
again in a single co-ordinate system. Hence when both the displacement and the 
displacement gradients are small, (57.11) yields ofjoX1 ~ ofjo x1, and (57.9) shows 
that the tensors measuring strain, rotation, and elongation at X are numerically 
equal, component by component, to their Counterparts at aJ. 
1 TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 19]. An apparently more complicated result is obtained by 
CI SOTT! [ 1944, 4] for the case when the first deformation is rigid. 2 While not stated by CAUCHY, this theorem is obvious from his work [1841, 1, Part II]. 3 Otherwise, weshall not have x1 -+X1 as U-+0. Note also that the above statement does 
not apply to the displacement vector when considered as a function of both ;r and X, but 
does apply to it when considered as a function of ;r only or of X only. 
Sects. 59, 60. Physical motivation for the theory of oriented bodies. 309 
59. Perturbation series. A concept of "small" more restricted than that 
used in the previous sections was formalized by E. and F. CossERAT1 and has 
been used by many authors subsequently. We consider a family of displacement 
vectors Bu given by the formal power series 
(59.1) 
where the functions u .. are given and kept fixed and B is a parameter to which 
no meaning need be attached. Various powers of B occur in the various measures 
of deformation and rotation calculated from (59.1). In each of these, the terms 
multiplied by B" are said to be "of order n ". In such a scheme it is impossible, 
for example, to have mean rotation ii and elongation E which are not of the 
same order. Moreover, the first, second, third, ... , derivatives of the n-th order 
approximation to Bu cannot decrease in order of smallness. Such a scheme, 
therefore, cannot include a displacementsmall in the sense used in earlier sections 
yet yielding strains which are not small, though it is easy to construct examples 
of families of displacements depending on a parameter in such a way that as 
the displacement vanishes the accompanying strain does not. The use of perturbation series restricts the dass of functions which are considered in the limit 
process which always stands behind the concept of "small ". By so doing, it 
facilitates formal calculation and perhaps also the proving of approximation 
theorems, but at the same time it limits the breadth and usefulness of results 
dependent upon it. 
f) Oriented bodies. 
60. Physical motivation for the theory of oriented bodies. All the foregoing 
analysis in this subchapter has concerned the changes of length and direction 
undergone by an arbitrary differential element dX in a deformation from X 
to a;. In some physical problems more than this much information is needed. 
The additional data most commonly relevant are the fates of certain preferred 
directions. 
First, in some physical materials as they come to band physical anisotropy 
is observable. For example, the stress required to effect a given extension in 
an elastic crystal differs with the direction in which the extension is to occur. 
For the description of the deformation of crystals, then, a mathematical model 
should carry not only the particle X to the place a; but also directions at X into 
directions at a;. In fact, all relevant analysis for an arbitrary element at X has 
already been given. For the intended interpretation, however, the directions 
selected at X will not be arbitrary, and a dual formalism is not appropriate. 
All that is needed is a notation suited for distinguishing directions given at X 
by some rule known a priori. 
It is a different matter, however, with thin bodies. Thin bodies are mathematical models for physical objects having one or two dimensions much smaller 
than the third. For definiteness, consider a circular cylinder. The object of a 
theory of thin cylinders is to produce directly the same predictions as would 
result from a corresponding three-dimensional theory in the limit as the diameter of the cylinder approaches zero while the resultant loads and the resistance 
of the material to deformation approach finite and non-vanishing limits. For 
results of the kind wished, obviously it is not enough to represent the rod only 
1 [1896, 1, § 8]. Equivalently, SrGNORINI [1943, 6, § 18] systematically calculated the 
n-ih derivatives at B = 0 of quantities associated with a family of displacements Bu. 
310 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 60. 
as a straight line which may be lengthened and bent, since such a theory does 
not describe the twisting of the cylinder about its axis. A proper one-dimensional 
theory, then, cannot be restricted to point deformations, but must also include 
directions which can suffer rotations independent of the deformations of the 
points with which they are associated1• An adequate theory ofthin bodies cannot 
be merely the intrinsic deformation theory for a Riemannian space of one or 
two dimensions, but rather must consider such spaces imbedded in a Euclidean 
space of three dimensions. 
In the eighteenth century special theories of rods and shells were proposed 
with little or no reference to phenomena in three dimensions. At the beginning 
of the nineteenth century, after general three-dimensional theories were accepted 
in certain domains of mechanics, CAUCHY and PmssoN sought to obtain theories 
forthin bodies by averaging over a cross-section the results from a three-dimensional theory and then letting the cross-sectional area approach zero. From this 
point of view, no special geometrical apparatus is necessary for the description 
ofthin bodies. The twisting of a circular cylinder, for example, may be measured 
in a three-dimensional description by the parameter K introduced in Sect. 48; 
if we Iet the diameter of the cylinder approach zero, the value of K remains unchanged and emerges as the measure of twist in the limiting formulae appropriate 
to the cylinder represented as but a line. It has turned out, however, that in 
the case of most if not all of the specific theories of materials in common use, 
the behavior of solutions for a body of thickness a in the neighborhood of a = 0 + 
is highly singular 2• While the three-dimensional viewpoint is certainly the more 
fundamental, the mathematical problems to which it has given rise are among 
the most difficult in analysis. The majority of modern studies of thin bodies 
pretending to adopt the three-dimensional approach in fact fall to establish any 
rigorous limit formulae but instead rest on concealed assumptions equivalent 
to those for an independent theory. In any case, independent theories of thin 
bodies are of interest and currency sufficient to justify discussion of their foundations. 
Returning once more to three-dimensional bodies, even for them we may 
discern possible interpretations for an arbitrarily oriented medium. Suppose, 
for example, that the dielectric polarization vector is to be taken into account 
in the deformation of a crystal. This vector may be thought of as attached to 
a particle and suffering deformation, a deformation, however, which is not in 
general the same as that of a material element such as an axis of aeolotropy. In 
a similar way, a continuum model in which directions attached to a particle 
suffer deformation differing from that of material elements may be equivalent, 
as far as gross behavior is concerned, to a molecular model whose molecules have 
internal structure. 
That physical bodies should be presented as assernblies not only of points 
but also of directions associated with the points, in brief, as oriented bodies, was 
suggested by DUHEM 3• Theories based on this idea were constructed by E. and 
F. CossERAT4, but in the half century since their profound work was published, 
1 This was first remarked explicitly, though not very clearly, by ST. VENANT [1843, 
3, § 2]. 
2 Cf. E. and F. CossERAT [1907, 1] [1908, 2] [1909, 5, § 4]. The typical phenomenon 
is evanescence or confluence of boundary conditions in the limit. Of course the remark 
and those immediately following do not apply to exact averagings such as that presented 
in Sect. 213. 
3 [1893, 1, Chap. Il]. 
4 [1907, 1] [1909, 5]. 
Sect. 61. Theoriented bodies of E. and F. CossERAT. 311 
scant attention has been given to itl. Sects. 61 to64 present the theory of oriented 
bodies in the generaland invariant form given to it by ERICKSEN and TRUESDELL2• 
61. The oriented bodies of E. and F. CossERAT 3• To the point X assign a 
set oft> vectors D0 (X), a = 1, 2, ... , tJ, the directors of the body at X. According 
as X ranges over a region of positive volume, a surface, or a curve, we may speak 
of a solid, a shell, or a rod. By a deformation of the body we shall mean a transformation carrying X into x and the directors Da at X into directors da at x. 
In equations, 
X= x(X), (61.1) 
in geometrical terms, a deformation consists in a displacement of the points and 
independent rotations and stretches of the directors. In the special case when 
d~ = x7KD{;, the directors arematerial elements, and their presence adds nothing 
to the description already given in this chapter. In the special case when d~ = 
g'kD{;, the directors are invariable elements and add nothing to what has been 
explained above 4• In general, the directors are neither material nor invariable; 
i.e., d~ =f= x7K D{; and d~ =f= g'kD{;. 
In an oriented body, strain and rotation are defined from (61.1h as for the 
ordinary bodies considered earlier in this subchapter. What is new is the relation 
between the directors. For the full possibility of interpretation mentioned at 
the end of Sect. 60, it should be possible to use an arbitrarily large number of 
directors. However, an appropriate description of strain has never been constructed in this degree of generality. Therefore we add the assumption that 
there are but three directors Da, and that these are linearly independent. This 
number suffices for theories of rods, shells, and anisotropic · solids. 
Let the reciprocal directors Da be defined as the triad reciprocal to Da, so that 
where 
Note that 
(61.2) 
(61.3) 
(61.4) 
where {)ab is the angle between D 0 and Db. When the directors form an orthogonal 
unit triad, we thus obtain det Gab= 1. 
The director triads may be used to define anholonomic components. For 
example, if we set 
X~ = D'k X{)., 
then X~ =Dif X~, and from (26.1) 2 follows 
C~m =Gab X~ X~, 
Now set 5 
etc. 
(61.5) 
(61.6) 
(61.7) 
1 There is an exposition by SuDRIA [1935, 8]. In his § 9, SuDRIA notes an error in the 
CosSERATS argument and gives a different proof of invariance. We do not follow either the 
CossERATS or SuDRIA in detail, and we do not present the material on time rates given in 
SuDRIA's Chap. II. 
2 [1958, 1, Part II]. 3 E. and F. CossERAT [1909, 5, §§ 48- SO], ERICKSEN and TRUESDELL [1958, 1, §§ S-6]. 
Cf. also the discussion of infinitesimal strain by GüNTHER [1958, 4, § 2]. 
4 Selecting three orthogonal and invariable directors, we may use them as a fixed an-· 
holonomic frame and so obtain invariant forms for the results given in many of the older 
treatments of finite strain, where all quantities are referred to the common frame. 5 A definition of this kind is the starting point of the theory of non-integrable strain 
constructed by KRÖNER [1960. 3, § 4, Eq. (13)]. 
312 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
where we use the definition (App. 20.2). Hence 
D~M = WKPM n:, 
From (61.7) and (61.2) we find that 
2U{KM)P = Gab;PD'J.:D"l.t. 
Therefore Gab= const is equivalent to 
~MP=- WMKP· 
Sect. 61. 
(61.8) 
(61.9) 
(61.10) 
In this case, also, if we transform the Da at all points by the same orthogonal 
transformation, the components WKMP are invariant. From these results it follows that if the lengths of the directors and the angles between them are fixed, 
as is the case, for example, if the directors are chosen as an orthogonal unit 
triad, and if the point Xis made to traverse the XP co-ordinate curve at unit 
speed, the quantities WKMP are the components of angular velocity of the director 
frame Da carried by X. We do not need to use (61.10), and therefore we do not 
impose the restriction Ga 0 = const, but this special case serves to motivate our 
calling WKMP the wryness of the director frame in the undeformed material. 
Dual results hold for the deformed material, but the dual wryness tensor, 
since it refers only to the relative configurations of the director frames at different points in the deformed material, does not afford a comparison between 
the deformed and undeformed conditions. What we wish, in the kinematic terms 
used above, are generalizations of the angular velocities of the director frame 
at x relative to those of the director frame at X when x traverses the curve into 
which the path of Xis deformed. To this end, introduce the relative wryness at x: 
(61.11) 
Here, however, we encounter the quantities d~;K, the director gradients, which 
appear in the theory of deformation of oriented bodies along with the deformation 
gradients x~K as primary local variables. In general there are 27 director gradients; when the directors form an orthogonal unit triad, only 9 director gradients 
are independent. 
Set 
then 
d~=AkKD{f, D{f=aKkd~, a=A-1 . 
From (61.11) follows 
(61.12) 
(61.13) 
(61.14) 
A deformation of an oriented body is rigid if not only C = 1 but also the 
directors at x may be obtained from those at X by a uniform orthogonal transformation. In this case the tensor A defined by (61.12) is a covariantly constant 
orthogonal tensor, the first term on the right-hand side of (61.14) vanishes, 
and we see that F is orthogonally equivalent to W. 
To make use of these results, we consider the anholonomic components of W 
with respect to the directors at X, the anholonomic components of F with respect to the directors at x: 
WaoP== WKMP D{f Df! = D{f DbK;P' I'aoP== F.mPd~d'b = d~dbk;P' 
so that by (61.8) and (61.11) 3 we have 
(61.15) 
(61.16) 
Sect. 61. Theoriented bodies of E. and F. CosSERAT. 313 
lf we put g00 == g,md~ dg', then (61.14) assumes the form1 
FaoP = AkK;PDf! dak + gac cecwebP· (61.17) 
Also 2F(ab)P = gab;P· 
Now Ais an orthogonal tensor if and only if gab= Gab· When Ais a uniform 
orthogonal tensor, (61.17) reduces to 
FabP = WabP· (61.18) 
Conversely, suppose (61.18) holds. From (61.15) follows 
gkmd~db;P = gKMD: D~p; 
Since this holds for all choices of a and &, we deduce 
gab;P = Gab;P· 
Hence 
(61.19) 
(61.20) 
(61.21) 
where the Kab are constants of integration representing constant differences of 
length and angle. Thus (61.18) asserts that the lengths and angles of the two 
sets of directors differ by constants, so that the tensor A is orthogonal everywhere if it is orthogonal at one point. From the foregoing analysis we conclude 
that necessary and sufficient conditions for rigid deformation of an oriented body are 
1. CKM = gKM• l 
2. FabK = WabK• f 
3. At some one point, Ais orthogonal. 
(61.22) 
The tensor W thus appears as analogous to the metric tensor g, while F is analogous to GREEN's deformation tensor, C. However, we must bear in mind that 
while (61.22) 1 is a general tensorial condition, (61.22) 2 is not, since the anholonomic 
components FabM and WabM are calculated with respect to different frames. 
The relative wryness F is thus a measure of strain of orientation, as contrasted 
with the strain of position analysed earlier in this chapter. J ust as the CKM are 
certain quadratic combinations of the deformation gradients x~K, the FabM are 
certain linear combinations of the director gradients d~;K· In general, the numbers of independent quantities xkK, C KM, .. d~. K, and FabM are, respectively, 
9, 6, 27, 27. , - , 
It would be possible, in analogy to Sect. 32, to define and characterize a 
general measure of strain of orientation. One such measure is given by 
(61.23) 
1 Since the anholonomic components of W and F are defined with respect to different 
anholonomic frames, the usual rules for manipulating anholonomic components do not 
always apply. For our purposes the particular choices (61.15) for the anholonomic components are essential. For example, if instead we set 
W\p"" WKMPD'k Df;l, F0 bp =cFkMpd~ dg', we obtain from (61.14) 
F\p = AkK;P d~ D{f + W0 bP· 
Therefore a necessary and sufficient condition for A to be covariantly constant is 
F0 bp= W0 bP• 
but this is not at all the same as condition (61.18). 
314 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 62. 
corresponding to GREEN's tensor E (Sect. 31). Necessary and sufficient for a 
rigid deformation are the conditions 
E=O, J=O, (61.24) 
along with the orthogonality of A at one point. We do not take up the question 
of characterizing all possible measures of strain of orientation. 
A principle of duality analogaus to that of Sect. 14 may be formulated. The 
reader will easily construct analogues of c, e, etc. 
Not pausing to explore the structure whose traits have just been presented, 
we note only a formula for the gradient of relative wryness. By differentiating 
(61.11) we get 
(61.25) 
Hence 
F;,bM;K = F"mM;K d~db + F"mM (d~;K dg' + d~ db;K), } 
= dbk;MKd~ + gre (FaeMF'rbK + FebMF'raK - FacM-FebK) · (61.26) 
There is no doubt that with the apparatus constructed here much of the work 
on special theories of oriented media could be unified and correlated. In the 
following sections we present only the siruplest and most immediate applications. 
In view of what we have explained already, the theory of deformation of an 
oriented body can be organized as follows: 
I. Strain of position 
A. Intrinsic theory 
B. Imbedding theory 
II. Strain of orientation. 
The intrinsic theory, based on relations between the fundamental tensors g and C, 
for three-dimensional boJies has been studied in detail earlier in the chapter. 
For bodies of one and two dimensions it is somewhat simpler but not essentially 
different. While curved rods and shells are not Euclidean spaces, the analysis 
based on the mapping (16.2) and the formulae (26.1) is valid in a Riemannian 
space of any nurober of dimensions 1. However, the conditions of compatibility 
given in Sect. 34 are no Ionger appropriate, since the curvature of a rod or shell 
may be changed arbitrarily by deformation. The theory of finite rotation given 
in Part c continues to be meaningful, but only when the rod or shell is regarded 
from the Euclidean three-dimensional space in which it is imbedded. In treating 
the imbedding theory, however, it is fitter to use the concepts of differential 
geometry: The curvature and torsion of a curve, the second differential form of 
a surface. In the above program, then, Part I A has been given in principle 
already, while Part I B can be gotten with little labor from geometry, so in what 
follows the major attention will be given to Part II. 
62. Anisotropie solids. To represent anisotropic solids, the directors are 
chosen as material elements 2 and hence are related by (20.3): 
d~=x\D{!, x~K=d~D<J,;, X~= D{fdf. (62.1) 
Hence by (26.2) and (29.1) follows 
(62.2) 
1 FADOVA [1890, 8]. 
2 E.g. ERICKSEN and RIVLIN [1954, 6, § 2]. 
Sect. 63. Rods. 
so that the anholonomic components of E are given by 
Eab == i (gab- Gab)· 
Also 
315 
(62.3) 
(62.4) 
When the Da form an orthogonal unit triad, we have Gab=Gab=t5ab• and 
the foregoing formulae simplify. E.g., from (62.2) 3 and (62.4) we get 
Ic = trace gab, Ic = trace gab, III0 =detgab· (62.5) 
In the application to anisotropic solids, assignment of the directors Da results 
from a priori knowledge concerning the nature of the undeformed body. For a 
different interpretation of this same formalism, we may select the directors as 
tangent to the co-ordinate curves. The resulting formulae in terms of anholonomic 
components are then identifiable with the results usually derived by use of convected co-ordinate systems (Sects. 66B, 150). 
The case when the directors are material is a trivial one from the viewpoint 
of the general theory in Sect. 61, since the strain of orientation is then not independent of the strain of position. Although the wryness is not needed for applications to anisotropic solids, it is interesting to specialize its theory to the present 
case. By comparing (62.1) and (61.12) we obtain AkK=x~K. aKk=Xl_\, and 
(61.14) becomes ' ' 
(62.5) 
In homogeneaus strain, the first term on the right-hand side is zero, and we see 
that Fand Ware the components of the same tensor with respect to the deformation. More generally, Eq. (62.5) shows that when the present formalism is applied 
to material directors, we may construct in terms of it an interpretation of the 
second derivatives of the deformation. 
63. Rods. Let a curve 1i' in the undeformed material be given by the parametric equations 
XK = XK(5)' K = 1, 2, 3, (63.1) 
where it is convenient to regard 5 as arc length. In a deformation 1i' is mapped 
onto a curve c given by 
xk = xk(s), k = 1, 2, 3' 
where 
s = s(5). 
The stretch ). is given by 
(63 .2) 
(63.3) 
(63 .4) 
where T is the unit tangent to 15. This completes the intrinsic theory of strain 
of position. 
For the imbedding theory of strain of position, we remind the reader that 
if 1i' and c have the same curvature and torsion as functions of 5, then one may 
be brought into point-by-point coincidence with the other by means of suitable 
rigid motion. Thus a complete description of the strain of position, as far as the 
imbedding theory is concerned, is given by the curvatures and torsions of c 
and 1i' as functions of 5. 
We come now to the strain of orientation. As a preliminary, we note that 
(63.4) illustrates two alternatives that we shall always have before us. If the 
deformation is specified only by the relations (63.1), (63.2), and (63.3), we have 
316 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 63. 
(63.4h at once, but the tensor C occuring in (63.4) 3 has no meaning. If, on the 
other hand, we regard ((/ as a single material line in a three-dimensional body 
subject to the deformation (16.2), then ((/ may be calculated from (26.2) 2 , and 
(63.4)a emerges as a special case from (26.4). 
For example, we can set 
j-·· =A··· dX~ ···- ... ;K dS . (63. 5) 
Fora double field A::: (5, s), by putting the definition (App. 20.2) into (63.5) we get 
j-··= oA~+ oA~ ~ +{ . }A··· dXK + ... +{. }A··· dxk !_s_+··· (6 _6) ... as OS dS • K ... dS • k ... ds dS ' 3 
and in this formula appear only quantities which can be calculated from the 
equations of the curves ((/ and c and the deformation s =s (S). For a strictly 
aue-dimensional approach, Eq. (63.6) rather than (63.5) should be taken as the 
definition of A; as far as results are concerned, it makes no difference. 
In conformity with this notation, set 
~ dXK XK=--- -- dS ' 
~k dxk ds 
X=-·--
- ds dS ' (63 .7) 
where XK and xk are given parametrically by (63.1) and (63.2). Note also that 
for a scalar F(S) we have simply F·= dFfd S. 
We begin by constructing a differential description of the undeformed rod((/. 
We assign directors Da to the points of ((/ and set 
Wa -DaD~K b= K b' (63.8) 
so that 
XK=D:ra. n:=D:wba· 2U(ab)=Gab• GabPTb=1. (63.9) 
The scalars Ta, anholonomic components of the unit tangent, are the lengths 
of the projections of the unit tangent upon the reciprocal directors; the Gab 
prescribe the lengths and mutual angles of the directors; the tensor W, whose 
anholonomic components are the rates of change of the directors resolved along 
the directions of the reciprocal directors, is the wryness of the directors along ((/. 
By (63.9) 3 we see that if the Gabare constant along ((/,andin that case only, W 
may be regarded as an angular velocity as explained following (61.10). Sometimes 
it is preferable to use tensor components rather than anholonomic components: 
WKM = i5: D':J = D: WbaD':J, B: = WKMD:. wab = D~ WKMDr. (63.10) 
(If ((/ is thought of as imbedded in a three-dimensional oriented body, the wryness 
JVKM along ((/ is related to the wryness of the body, viz. WKMP• as follows: 
WK M--WK X~P) MP • (63.11) 
Suppose the quantities Ta, wab, and Gab=Gba be given as any functions 
of S suchthat (63.9)a and (63.9) 4 are satisfied and suchthat Gis positive definite. 
Eqs. (63.9)1, 2 may then be regarded as a differential system for determining 
XK(S) and D:(S). From (63.9) 2 , any solution satisfies 
GKMt5fnr = 2GKMD~ nrtw'b)· (63.12) 
We may write (63.9) 3 in the form Gab=2Gc(a W'b); comparing this result with 
(63.12) shows that GKMD: Dr and Gab satisfy the same first order differential 
Sect. 63. Rods. 317 
system. By uniqueness of solutions of such systems, (63.8h will hold for all S 
if it holds for one value of S. Given a solution XK(S), D{{(S) of the system 
(63.9Jt 2 , suppose (63.8) 2 is satisfied; by (63.9) 4 follows 
(63.13) 
so the solution represents an oriented rod with S as arc length. It is easily shown 
that two sets of initial data consistent with (63 .8) 2 are related by a rigid motion, 
perhaps combined with a reflection, and that any rigid motion combined with a 
reflection carries any solution of the system (63 .9)1 2 into another. Uniqueness 
of solutions of this system thus implies that assignment of P, wab, and Gab 
determines '?? and its directors to within a rigid motion combined with a reflection. 
In the special case when the directors are chosen as the unit tangent, principal 
normal, and binormal to ~. oriented so as to form a right-handed system, the 
Serret-Frenet formulae assert that 
0 " 0 
II wab II = -" 0 T (63.14) 
0 -T 0 
where " and r are the curvature and the torsion of ~. No such result holds for 
a general triad of directors or would be of interest here, since we seek not the 
properties of the curve itself but rather of a set of axes attached to the curve 
but turning independently of it. 
For another special case, consider a single unit director D which is normal 
to the curve ~. and let it subtend an angle rp ( S) with the principal normal N, 
measured positively away from the binormal, so that 
DK = NK cos rp +BK sin rp, (63.15) 
where B is the binormal. The quantity rp is the twist of D with respect to '??. 
If both the curve ~ and the director D are subjected to the same orthogonal 
transformation, rp is unchanged. Since DK NK = cos rp, we have 
fjK NK + DK JVK = - sin rprp; 
by (63.10) 3 and the Serret-Frenet formula for N follows 
WKMDM NK + DK(-" TK + r ßK) =-sin rprp. 
Substitution of (63.15) in this result yields 
~K M)NK NM COS rp + (WKMNK ßM + T + rp) sin rp = 0. 
(63.16) 
(63.17) 
(63.18) 
Thus far in this paragraph we have spoken of but a single director D, leaving 
arbitrary the choice of the remaining two directors required for definition of 
the wryness W by (63.8) 3 . Since we are here interested only in the single 
director D, and since this is a unit vector, there is no loss of generality in 
selecting the other two directors as of fixed length and subtending fixed angles 
with D and with each other. By (63.9)a follows ~KM>=O, and thus, provided 
rp=f=O, from (63.18) we obtain 
(63.19) 
That is, the twist is the excess of WMK NK ßM over the torsion. The scalar WMK NK ßM 
is itself an anholonomic component of W with respect to the principal frame of '??. 
If we let D* be a unit vector suchthat D*, D, and T form a right-handed unit 
318 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 63. 
triad, sinceD*K=-NKsin q;+BKcos q;, then WKMBKNM=D*K~MDM, so 
that by (63.1üh and (63.19) follows 
(63 .20) 
This formula is the basis of the classical attempts to construct a theory of strain 
for bent and twisted rods (for references, see the appendix at the end of this 
section). 
Since the rotation of D may be prescribed in any smooth way as we traverse~' 
there can be no general connection between the twists of two different directors. 
In the applications of the theory to elasticity, it is customary to think of a rod 
as a line furnished with normal cross-sections; these are represented, for the purposes of the theory, only by their principal axes of geometrical inertia and perhaps 
one or two constants such as their geometrical moments of inertia about these 
axes. The twist of the unstrained rod is then defined as the twist of either of these 
axes relative to ~. Since these axes are normal to one another, a unique twist 
is obtained. 
Now consider the deformation of ~ into c, defined not only by (63.3) but 
also by a relation setting directors da along c into correspondence with the 
directors Da along ~: 
(63.21) 
Pursuing the interpretation mentioned above, we might choose for one director d 
a unit vector along the direction into which one of the directors D, considered 
as material, is deformed in the three-dimensional deformation experienced by 
the finite rod whose strain our aue-dimensional theory is intended to represent. 
Such a director, d 0 , would not in general be orthogonal to c. In practice, d is 
selected as the normal to the unit tangent t which lies in the plane of d 0 and t. 
The triple orthogonal directions so determined are called the principal torsionflexure axes in the deformed rod. The twist in the deformed rod is then defined 
as the twist of d relative to c. 
Obviously this classical procedure is motivated only by formal simplicity 
and furnishes an inadequate description of the strain of a rod. In the first place, 
twist is defined unsymmetrically with respect to the strained and unstrained 
rods. While the twist of the unstrained rod is uniquely determined, two different twists can be obtained for the strained rod, depending on which of the 
principal axes of inertia of the cross-section is selected for D in the unstrained 
rod, and by the above remarks, these two twists are in general entirely unrelated 
to one another. Moreover, the insistence that d be normal to c is merely artificial 
and does not represent any geometrical requirement. 
For a more precise description, we need only adapt to c what has already 
been done for ~. Since the operation "~" defined by (63.6) is a derivative with 
respect to S, not s, the analysis, while strictly parallel, is not merely dual to that 
given above. W e set 
F a _ dad~k b = k b· (63.22) 
The Cab are the components of deformation; pab is the relative wryness of c. 
By analogy with what was said earlier in connection with ~ it follows that 
if t0 , Cab' and pab are given functions of 5 subject to the conditions that Cab 
be symmetric and positive definite and that 
(63.23) 
Sect. 63A Appendix. History of the description of strain in a rod. 319 
the rod <-" is determined to within a rigid motion combined with a reflection, 
its arc length s being obtained by integrating the equation 
(63.24) 
A. being the stretch. What has been shown is summarized in the following fundamental theorem on the strain of a rod: Given a rod~ with arc length S and 
directors Da, prescription of the eighteen scalars ta, Cab, andFab as functions of S subfect 
to the aforementioned conditions determines a second rod c with arc length 6 and 
directors da (s), uniquely to within a rigid motion combined with a reflection. In 
other words, the quantities ta, Cab, and pab furnish a complete differential description of the strain of a rod. It suffices to specify only the twelve scalars ta, Cab, 
and Ca[bF0 , 1 since one can then calculate pab using (63.23). 
The apparatus constructed is very general, enough so to include what would 
be regarded physically as an anisotropic rod. To represent a physically isotropic 
rod, let D1 be the unit tangent to ~ and d 1 the unit tangent to c. In this case, 
T1 = t1 = 1, T2 = T3 = t2 = t3 = 0. The remaining two directors, both along ~ and 
along c, may be assigned arbitrarily. 
Again we consider a general director frame. To determine the finite rotation 
of a rod, it is necessary to regard the rod from the Euclidean space in which 
it is imbedded. So as to motivate the definition shortly to be given, we first 
consider the case when ~ is a material curve in a three-dimensional body and 
the directors Da are material elements, this being the case that one-dimensional 
theories of rods are intended to idealize. Then, as remarked in Sect. 62, in 
(61.13) we have AkK=x~K· aKk=X~. By the theory given in Sect. 37, we can 
decompose xk;K uniquely into a stretch and a rotation, and the rotation so determined is the rotation of the principal axes of strain at X into the principal axes 
of strain at x. In a purely one-dimensional theory, we do not have available 
the x7K• but from the two sets of directors we can define AkK by (61.12), and, 
since the linear independence of the directors assures us that AkK is non-singular, 
from the polar decomposition theorem (Sect. App. 43) we can write 
(63.25) 
where 0 is an orthogonal double tensor and P and p are positive definite symmetric tensors. The tensor 0 then represents the local rotation of the rod. What 
we have proved regarding it is summarized as follows: Given two rods with directors Da and da, a unique local rotation is defined by (63.25); the rotation is independent of the choice of the directors to this extent, that if we imagine and then leave 
fixed a deformation of a three-dimensional body in which ~ is a materialline and 
the given directors Da are carried materially into the given directors da, then we 
may choose as directors any other sets of linearly independent material vectors and 
obtain the same rotation. When the directors are chosen as above, (63.22) 2 becomes 
(63.26) 
the quantities Cab are anholonomic components of the three-dimensional deformation tensor C with respect to the directors of ~. 
63A. Appendix. History of the description of strain in a rod. The concept of twist may be 
traced back to ST. VENANT [1843, 3, ~ 2], who called it "gauchissement". He obtained 
(63.20) [1845, 3], having given an approximation to it earlier [1843, 3, ~ 15]. BrNET [1844, 1] 
claimed that he had introduced the concept of twist shortly aftcr 1815. The introduction 
of the principal torsion-flexure axes is due to ST. VENANT [1843, 3, ~ 2]. Other attempts 
to formulate a general theory of strain in a rod were made by KIRCHHOFF [1859. 2, § 2] 
320 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 64. 
[1876, 2, Vor!. 28, § 2] and CLEBSCH [1862, 2, §§ 48-49, 55]. All this early work employs 
more or less hidden approximations and is difficult to follow with confidence. The first 
Straightforward analysis is that of LovE [1893, 5, § 233]. 
Our Sect. 63 follows ERICKSEN and TRUESDELL [1958, 1, §§ 7-14]; their treatment is 
freely adapted from that of E. and F. CoSSERAT [1909, 5, § 21] (cf. also [1908, 2]), whose 
eonsiderations, in our opinion rather fragmentary, are restricted to the common frame. 
The only previous analysis approaching the generality of Sect. 63 is that of HA Y [ 1942, 
8, §§ 2-3]. In effect, he takes the Da as any unit triad suchthat D 1 is the unit tangent 
to '6', and he chooses co-ordinate systems such that not only D{f = l5{f but also d~ = (j~. 
Hence (61.12) yields AkK = (5~, aKk = t'lf, but it must be remernbered that the co-ordinates 
at x are not generally orthogonal. In these Co-ordinates we have from (63.22) 2 
(63A.1) 
thus the components of the metric tensor at x are numerically equal to the components of 
stretch, this being a generalization of HAY's Eq. (3.9). From (63.22) 3 we get in these Co-ordinates 
(63A.2) 
where the rod c is taken as the x1-curve with x1= s. The skew-symmetric part of this equation 
is essentially HAY's Eq. (3.5); hence our relative wryness F includes and generalizes HAY's 
rotation vector w. 
64. Shells 1• Let the undeforrned surface Y be given by 
XK = XK (VI, V2) = XK (VE)' 
the deformed surface ~ by 
(64.1) 
(64.2) 
where, as in the rest of this section, Latin indices run from 1 to 3, Greek indices 
from 1 to 2. The deformation is specified by the functional forms of the righthand sides of (64.1) and (64.2), augmented by 
V= V (V). (64.}) 
For full generality, it is sufficient but not necessary to take 
ve=J~ VE. 
The surface metric tensors are given by 
dS2=At1EdVL1dVE=A edv d~e,} 
ds2 = a6 e dv6 dve = a.-1 EdV.-1 dV"', 
where 
(64.4) 
(64.5) 
(64.6) 
and where ";" denotes a partial derivative. If A (V) and a (v) are known, and if 
the parameter transformation (64-3) is given, we may calculate for any material 
element the changes of length and angle occasioned by the deformation. Also, 
we may calculate the total curvatures R1212 of Y and ~- Corresponding to any 
assigned real symmetric tensor a(v), with A(V) and the relation (64.3) regarded 
1 The general theory of strain of position for a surface was discussed by UsAI [1909, 9]. 
Strain of orientation was considered but scarcely analysed by E. and F. CossERAT [1908, 1] 
[1909, 5, §§ 30-32]. Ünr treatment fol!ows ERICKSEN and TRUESDELL [1958, 1, §§ 15-20]. 
Sect. 64. Shells. 321 
as given, there exists a surface d into which Y is deformed, and any two such 
surfaces d1 and d2 are applicable. In principle, this completes the intrinsic theory 
of strain of position of a shell. 
In terms of the three-dimensional equations (64.1) and (64.2}, by (App. 19.7) 
and (App. 21.5) we may calculate the fundamental forms A, B, and a, b: 
ALI =gKMXfLIX~, a~.;=gkmx7.,x1. (64.7) 
BLI =NKX~ , b6 .;=nkx7"<• 
where N and n are the unit normals to Y and d, and where the total covariant 
derivatives are defined as in Sect. App. 20. We have 
BLI 8 dVLldV8 =B".;dv"dv<, b";dv6 dv<=bLI 8 dV"'dV8 , (64.8} 
where 
(64.9} 
The tensors a and b are related by (App. 21.8}, the Gauss and Mainardi-Codazzi 
equations; A and B, by the duals of those equations. (In applying here the 
results of Sect. App. 21, we are to replace Greek majuscules by Greek minuscules 
throughout.) 
When Y and a parameter mapping (64-3} are given, assignment of arbitrary 
symmetric tensors a and b satisfying (App. 21.8) determines a surface d into which Y 
is deformed, uniquely to within a rigid motion1• The surface d is obtained by 
solving (App. 21.7} with xk and nk assigned at one point, and Yis obtained by solving 
the dual equations. In principle, this completes the imbedding theory of strain 
of position. 
In approximate theories of elastic shells it is customary to take the changes 
of principal curvature as measures of strain. To do this in the exact theory would 
introduce complications analogous to those resulting from using the displacement vector and the strain tensors in finite strain of three-dimensional bodies. 
The theory of strain of orientation for a shell may be constructed in analogy 
to what was done for three-dimensional bodies in Sect. 61. At the points X of 
the undeformed shell .9, assign a set of three directors Da, and put 
so that 
X~= n: X~, D:;LI = D~Wb01 • 
Then by (64.7h follows 
ALls= Gab X~ X~. 
while by (64.7} 3 follows 
BL!s= NKD:(x~;E+ wabEX~). 
From the relation (64.11}, 
XfsLI = Db' (X~;LI + WbaLI X~), 
D~ELI = Df (W\LI WbaE + W'aE;LI} · 
We also have the integrabi:ity conditions 
1 E.g. EISENHART [1940, 9, § 39]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/t. 21 
(64.10) 
(64.11} 
(64.12) 
(64.13) 
(64.14) 
(64.15) 
(64.16} 
322 C. TRUESDELL and R. TüUPIN: The Classica] Field Theories. Sect. 64. 
whence follows 
axf.d Wb X" - ·av.E"l + a[.E" .d]- 0, (64.17) 
wc ".Wb 'LI- wcb.d Wb ". + 2 ~wcc:[.d = o. 
b- a a- av.:oJ (64.18) 
From (64.10h and (64.'11) 2 
(64.19) 
Eqs. (64.11) may be regarded as a differential system for the equation X(V) 
of the shell and for the assignment of directors upon it. When X~, Gab= Gb a, 
and Wba.d are prescribed as functions of VL1 subject to the conditions (64.17) to 
(64.19), the system (64.11) is completely integrable. Locally there will then 
exist a unique solution X (V) and Da (V) taking on prescribed values at one value 
V0 of V. Provided that not all the quantities X?.d X~1 vanish, that Gab be positive 
definite and that the prescription of Da (V0) be consistent with (64.10) 2 , the 
solution represents an oriented shell and the relation (64.10) 1 holds. Using the 
uniqueness of solutions, it isasimple matter to show that X~, Gab• and Wba.d 
determine Y and its direcfors to within a rigid displacement combined with a reflection. 
At the points JJ of the deformed shell 6, assign the directors da, and, as suggested by (63.22), put 
(64.20) 
so that 
(64.21) 
The Cab are the components of deformation; F\Ll is the relative wryness of J; 
the x~ are certain tangent vectors. Then 
a6;= C ab XLI a X,s- b VLl V"" } ;6 ;~· 
b61; = nk d~ [F\ s V:f x~ V:1 + x~;.E" V:1 V:1 + x~ V:1öJ. (64.22) 
Thus we see that knowledge of v, x~. Gab• and Fab.d and d~ as functions of V 
suffices to determine the first and second forms of the deformed shell 6. 
By analogy with (64.17) to (64.19), we have 
(64.23) 
(64.24) 
and 
(64.25) i 
Further, when v, P\s, x~. and Cab are given, subject to the requirements (64.23) 
to (64.25), lv";.s-J =f= 0, and the conditions that Ca b be symmetric and positive 
definite and that not all the quantities x[.d x~1 vanish, the differential system 
(64.21) determines an oriented shell J to within, a rigid motion combined with 
a reflection, and (64.20) is satisfied. 
What has been shown, then, is summarized in the following junda·mental 
theorem on the strain of a shell: Given a shell Y with fundamentalforms A (V) 
and B (V) and with directors Da, prescription of the 32 quantities vö, F\ s, x~, and Cob 
Sect. 64. Shells. 323 
as functions of V subfect to the aforementioned conditions determines a second shell ~ 
with equation x =X (v) and directors da (v), uniquely to within a rigid displacement 
combined with a reflection. In other words, the quantities v~. F\z, x~, and Cab 
furnish a complete description of the strain of a shell. 
A theory of rotation is easily constructed by analogy to what was done for 
rods in Sect. 63. 
We now consider resolution of these results in terms of normalandtangential 
components. Since x:;_, X~, and NK are three linearly independent vectors, 
we may write 
where 
D~==AJED{fXK;E, Da=D{fNK. 
(64.26) 
(64.27) 
Then by (App. 21.6) follows 
whencc 
D~.1 = (D~;.1- DaB~) X~+ (D~ Bs.1 + Da;.1) NK, 
NKD~-1 = D~ Bs-1 + Da;-1, 
XK;ED~.1 = DaE;.1- Da BE.1· 
(64.28) 
(64.29) 
(64-30) 
From the fact that B.1E and A.1E determine X(V) to within a rigid motion and 
that D~ (V) is uniquely determined by D~ and Da when X (V) is known, it follows 
that B.1 s, A.1 3 , D~, and Da determine Y' and its directors to within a rigid motion. 
Other than the duals of (App. 2!.8), there are no compatibility conditions to 
be satisfied by these quantities. 
It involves no restriction to require that ~ and one director not tangent 
to ~. say d 1 , be material with respect to an unspecified three-dimensional deformation. That is, if x(v), d1 (v), v(V), X(V), and D 1 (V) are given subject 
to the condition that d1 (D1) be not tangent to ~(Y'), there will exist infinitely 
many mappings x (X) such that 
x(v) =x(X(V(v))), X(V) =X(x(v(V))) (64-31) 
and 
d1 = x~K Df, (64.32) 
the quantities x~K being uniquely determined as functions of V by (64.32) and 
x~6 = x7KX~ V;1. (64.33) 
Since the remaining directors can be assigned arbitrarily, they will not necessarily be material with respect to this deformation. 
The formalism just given is easily specialized so as to give results depending 
on particular choices of Co-ordinates for the strain of position. We consider 
here only the most general form of the usual approach, that given by SYNGE 
and CHIEN1. The intended in:terpretation is that ~ and d 1 are material, so that 
(64.31) to (64.33) apply, with D 1 varying with the deformation x(X) in such a 
way that d 1 =n. Choose co-ordinates and _parameters such that 
x(X)=X, X(V)=(Vl,V2,0), x(v)=(vl,t 2,0), gk 3 =bka· (64.34) 
Then 
and 
N = b (Gaa)- i !ff 'M3 ' (64.3 5) 
(64.36) 
1 [1941, 9]. Our formula (64.38) is essentially their formula (69). Cf. also CHIEN [1944. 
2, Eq. (6.13)]. 
21* 
324 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
From (64.7)s, (64.34) 2 , (64.35)s, and (64.36)1 we have 1 
2BsA = 2NK(a~:~~A +{:Ax~x~- {;Ll}x~). 
= 2 ( caa)-1 {/K} ~f ~~, 
=(GSS)~(oGaJ_~J+ oGKa_~K- oGJK ~J~K)+ avA z avz A axa z A 
+ caa)-~GaK ~A (ßAzA + oAAA _ oAzA) K avA avz avA ' 
which we may write in the form 
oGJ~ M~K = oGJa ~.{,. + ~~!!__ 1 + (Gaa)-1 caK ~A x ) ()X3 .::. A ()VA - oVZ Lf K 
( oA z A + oA A A_ _ oA ~-) _ 2 (Ga a) _ * B _ X oVA oVZ oVA .::.A· 
From (64.27) and (64.35), 
Sect. 64. 
(64.37) 
(64-38) 
DJA=GKa~~. Dl=(G33)-~. (64-39) 
Now, using (64.34)1 , (64.35)1 , and (64.39), we obtain 
X DK - G Xl ( anlf { K l XM np) 2 K;Z J;A-2 JK ;Z ()VA+ MPf ;A 1 • 
= 2G K~f{:A~~ ~:, 
From (64.30), (64.39), and (64.40), we have 
2XK;(zDfA)= ~:-~f~~ =DJZ;A + DJA;z- 2DIBZA• 
oD1z oD1A { A} =avF+ avs--2DIA ELl -2DIBZA• 
= oGJa !5-l.+ oGJa !51- G ~JA AI (oAz_~ + oAAI- oAzA_) avA "" avs "' Ja A ovA oV8 avi 
-2 (G33)-l BzA' 
(64.40) 
(64.41) 
which is similar to, but not identical with (64.38). The apparent discrepancy 
is resolved by noting that the equations 
AEA AA A = 15~, 0 = b~ = GSK GKJ ~~ = 33 J!5~ + GSK !5-k AsA (64.42) 
imply that 
(G33)-1G3K ~'k = _ 31 ~~AAs. (64.43) 
For ~. we have by analogy with (64.38) tagether with (64.34)1•4 
(64.44) 
SYNGE and CHIEN find it sufficient to introduce nine measures of strain. The 
set a<J.ß• b<J.ß• D1 A, and D1 is equivalent tothat which they use. These quantities 
1 Note that G1 3 =I= 0, G23 =1= 0 in general. 
Sect. 65. Continuous motion. 325 
satisfy three compatibility conditions, which may be taken as the duals 1 of 
(App. 21.8), and when [/ is given, they determine D1 uniquely and ~ to within a 
rigid motion. With the conventions adopted above, part of the problern involves 
determining a tensor gkm consistent with the conditions (64.36) 2, (64.44), and the 
fact that the Riemann tensor based on gkm must vanish; such complexity is 
the price one pays for eliminating the functions ;r (v) as unknowns. 
II. Motion. 
a) Velocity. 
65. Continuous motion. In the common frame (Sect. 13), consider a transformation 
z = z(Z, t). (65.1) 
The real parameter t is to be identified with the time; it is assigned a physical 
unit T distinct from that of length, L. For each fixed timet, (65.1) is a deformation of the type considered in Sect. 15. Such a one-parameter family of 
deformations is called a motion. 
The co-ordinates Z we think of as assigned once and for all to a given point 
in the material. Since they are the co-ordinates of the points at an arbitrary 
initial time, t =t0 , they serve for alltime as names for the particles of the material2. The co-ordinates z, on the other hand, we think of as assigned once and 
for all to a point in the Euclidean space where material bodies reside. They are 
the names of places. The motion (65.1)" chronicles the places z occupied by the 
particle Z in the course of time 3. 
To the assumptions already made in Sect. 16, now appropriate for each 
fixed t, we add counterparts for differentiation of (65.1) with respect to time 3 : 
Axiom of continuity. The motion (65.1) and its inverse, 
Z = Z (z, t), (65.2) 
possess continuous partial derivatives of as many orders as needed. 
For most developments, partial derivatives of the first two or three orders 
suffice 4• 
As a result of the axiom of continuity, during the motion a region remains 
always a region, a surface remains a surface, a line remains a line. Two particles 
once distinct remain ever so, and a body never splits asunder. In consequence 
of this severe restriction, many motions of physical interest are excluded from 
the formalism presented in this chapter. Among these are impacts, sliding, 
rolling, shocks, and the operring and sealing of cavities. 
What is really essential is an axiom expressing the impenetrability of 
matter: While a body may split in two, or two disjoint bodies may coalesce, 
1 These equations are equivalent to the three given by SYNGE and CHIEN [1941, .9, 
Eqs. (38), (39)]. 2 For physical interpretation, it is not only useless but in fact misleading and generally 
incorrect to attempt to identify what throughout this treatise we call partie/es with anything 
of a similar name in the molecular or atomic theories of physical matter. Cf. Sect. 2. 3 A principle of duality extending that of Sect. 14 is easy to work out; cf. DEUKER [1941, 
1, §IV]. In such a scheme, e.g., one can introduce as dual to the ordinary velocity ozfot 
the quantity oZfot, which is the rate at which particles move by a given place. We avoid 
such dual quantities as they do not promote the intended application, for which space and 
the matter occupying it are conceptually different. 4 In the case when the second spatial derivatives of Eqs. (65.1) and (65.2) do not nP-cessarily exist, LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 5] has formulated a condition sufficient that the ratio of the 
distances between two distinct particles at different times remain bounded above and below, 
uniformly over a finite region and in a finite interval of time. 
326 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 66. 
it never happens that the particles of two initially disjoint bodies infermingle. 
Mathematically expressed, this axiom requires that at any fixed time the dimension of the set of points upon which (65.1) and (65.2) fail tobe single-valued 
and continuous is always less than three 1 : in a word, that all singularities are 
isolated. 
This restriction allows us conveniently to divide kinematics into two parts, 
one of which, given in the present chapter, concerns continuous motions, while 
the theory of singular surfaces is given in the next. 
A different formalism is required to describe the diffusion of the several 
constituents of a mixture; this is presented in Sect. 159. 
66. Material and spatial co-ordinates. As in Sect. 14, we may introduce 
general co-ordinates. It is possible to select a different co-ordinate system at 
each time t, or, equivalently, to view the motion in terms of a co-ordinate system 
in motion with respect to the common frame. To do so is in some problems very 
convenient, but it introduces formal complications which we wish to avoid now, 
deferring them until Part g of this subchapter. Here we restriet attention to a 
single, fixed co-ordinate system ~. That is, the motion assumes the form 
where 
~=~(X, t), 
~ = f(z), 
X =X(~. t), 
X=f(Z), 
the function f being the same function in both (66.2h and (66.2h 
(66.1) 
(66.2) 
Insofar as we hav~ occasion to apply them, the results of Subchapter I are 
available at each fixed instant t. To indicate the restricted dass of co-ordinates, 
we replace XK by X"". The variables X"" and t are the material variables, the X"" 
being the material co-ordinates. The xk and t are the spatial variables, the xk 
being the spatial co-ordinates. Problems for which the X"" and t are taken as 
independent variables are said to be set in the material description; the xk and t, 
the spatial description (cf. the first appendix to this section). 
The remarks following (16.6) should be reread in the present connection. 
In particular, for purposes of interpretation we shall never describe properties 
of (66.1) as if it were a co-ordinate transformation. (For some other viewpoints, 
see the second appendix to this section.) Most of the results concerning motion 
are statements of instantaneous conditions at ~. Such statements will be tensorial 
equations of the form t~::::;'=O, invariant with respect to changes of stationary 
spatial co-ordinates and thus valid independently of our assumptions (66.2) 
regarding the co-ordinates at X. 
The material description is an immediate extension of the scheme used in the mechanics 
of mass-points, where the paths of the several distinct masses are traced, while the spatial 
description has no Counterpart in elementary mechanics. As DIRICHLET 2 remarked, the spatial 
description would seem inappropriate to problems concerning a finite free portion of matter, 
since the region of space to be occupied, and hence the range of the independent variables xk, 
is not known in advance. Nevertheless, the mathematical difficulties which accompany the 
material description have limited its use to two special ends: problems in one dimension, 
and the proof of general theorems. For the latter it is particularly convenient, besides being 
the more fundamental, and we shall use it much in this work. In any problern of the mechanics of continua it is always possible, though not always convenient, to use the material 
description exclusivelya. 
1 The formulation given by HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 46] is that (65.2) shall be singlevalued: Two distinct particles never occupy the same place. Since it excludes the junction 
or welding of two bodies, this formulation is too restrictive. 
2 [1860, 1, Introd.]. 3 Cf. LODGE [1951, 16]. 
Sects. 66 A, B. Material and spatial co-ordinates. 327 
Since X is the initial co-ordinate of the particle now at the place :r, a dependence upon 
the choice of the initial instant is implied, and (66.1h should properly be written 
:r = f(X, t0 , t). (66.3) 
Let :r1 and :r2 be the places occupied by X at the times t1 and t2 : 
(66.4) 
lt is equally possible to select :r1 as an identifying Iabel for the particle X, and since (66.3) 
is to hold for all particles and all times, we must have then 
:rz = f(:r1• t1• tz) · 
Comparison of (66.4) and (66.5) yields the functional equation 
f(f(X, t0 , t1), t1 , t) = f(X, t0 , t), 
(66.5) 
(66.6) 
which must be satisfied by thc relation f defining a motion 1. By means of (66.6) it is possible 
to prove the invariance of kinematical quantities with respect to choice of the initial time. 
Our special choice of co-ordinates, according to which the xa. are the values 
of the x~< when t = t0 , implies 
~x;l uX t=to = x~klt=t , a = ö~.l xa. = ö~ xklt=lo• 
(66.i) 
More generally, if tL·.'; is a tensor defined at ~ for all t, we put 
n.. · .{J- .lla. .ll{J .~:p .llq tk ... m •y ... 6= Uk··• UmUy ••. U6 p ... q (66.8) 
for its values at X when t = t0 • In many cases our results will hold independently 
of these formulae and hence when the material co-ordinates are any independent 
smooth designations for the particles, not necessarily their initial positions 2• 
66A. Appendix. History of the field description of motion. The first attempt to discuss 
any local features of the motion of a continuous medium in more than one dimension occurs 
in an isolated passage by D. BERNOULLI [1738, 1, § 11, '1[4], but he failed to introduce the 
velocity field. The first author to attempt to do so was EuLER [1745. 2, Chap. II, Satz 1, 
Anm. 3], who used intrinsic co-ordinates based on the stream fillets; the apparatus is far 
from complete. The velocity field for plane and for rotationally symmetric motions, in a 
fixed co-ordinate system, was employed and developed by D' ALEMBERT ( 1749) [ 17 52, 1, 
§ 43]. The fully general spatial description is due to EuLER (1752) [1757. 2, §§ 1-21] 
[1761, 2, §§ 1-41]. 
After a partial attempt in 17 51 [1767. 1, § 15]. EuLER formulated the material description in 1760 [1762, 1] [1766, 1, § 36] [1770, 1, §§ 100-118]. 
The origin of DIRICHLET's erroneous and commonly followed terminology, "Eulerian" 
for spatial and "Lagrangian" for material, was explained by RrEMANN, published by HANKEL 
[1861, 1, § 1], and corrected in detail by TRUESDELL [1954. 24, § 142 ]. 
The detailed history of field theories to 1788 has been written by TRUESDELL [1954. 25] 
[1955. 26] [1960, 4]. 
66B. Appendix. Other schemes of co-ordinates and notation. Many textbooks present 
elementary topics in kinematics in one of the systems of vectorial and polyadic notation; 
the bestisthat of GrBBS and WrLSON [1909, 6], but it is impractical for the more elaborate 
parts of the subject. Only the books of JAUMANN [1905, 2] and SPIELREIN [1916, 5] and the 
article of HEUN [1913, 4] begin to embrace the generality required today. The direct concepts and notations of the BouRBAKI school, at bottom little different from those of GrBBS, 
are explained and employed successfully by NoLL [1955. 18, Chap. 1]. 
Some of the older writers on finite deformation restricted the co-ordinate surfaces at :r 
to be the material surfaces which at t = t0 wcre co-ordinate surfaces at X. Various properties 
1 MorsrL [1942, 10]. 2 Cf. HILL [1881, 3, §IV], DEUKER [1941, 1, §§ II-IV], ÜLDROYD [1950, 22, §§ 2-3]. 
328 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 67, 68. 
of such convected co-ordinates have been formalized by HENCKY [1925, 7], ZELMANOV [1948, 39], 
GLEYZAL [1949, 12], ÜLDROYD [1950, 22, §§ 2-3], GREEN and ZERNA [1950, 10, §§ 2-3] 
[1954, 7, §§ 2.1-2.2], and LoDGE [1951, 16], and these co-ordinates are now the favorite of 
British authors. Some studies employing them regard (66.1) as a transformation of COordinates in a space without an invariant metric; others introduce as fixed spatial co-ordinate 
surfaces the loci of the convected co-ordinate surfaces at time t. Insofar as time rates other 
than the velocity are not involved, convected Co-ordinates are included as a special case of 
the scheme used in the present work, and the results of using them may be obtained by setting t = 0 in our formulae. For time rates in a convected system, see Sect. 150. 
67. Velocity1• The velocity ~ is the rate of change of position for a given 
particle: 
'k oxk X=--
- ot ' (67.1) 
where Xisheld constant in the motion (66.1)r. Hence the .ik are the contravariant components of a vector, whose magnitude i is the speed: X= Vikik. 
(In the common frame, it is customary toset u-i, v==y, w=z, but weshall 
not use this notation.) Since the origin of the position vector p is fixed, we have 
p =X, (67.2) 
and in passages where the direct vectorial significance rather than the tensorial 
components of the formula is uppermost, weshall prefer to write p rather than~. 
From (67.1) and (66.1h follows 
x=x(X,t): (67.3) 
The velocity emerges as a function of time for a given particle. However, we 
may eliminate X by (66.1) 2 , so obtaining the velocity as a function of time for 
a given place: . 
~ =x(X(x, t), t) =x(x, t). (67.4) 
The functional dependence (67.3) is appropriate to the material description; 
(67.4), to the spatial. 
A point where ~ = 0 is called a stagnation point. 
A motion such that the velocity field does not change in time at any given 
place is steady. For such a motion, (67.4) reduces to the form 
(67.5) 
More generally, any quantity which is a function of place only is said to be 
steady. 
Sometimes it is convenient to define steadiness not in the x, y, z system but in another 
appropriate to an observer moving at speed V in the x direction. Then a steady quantity f 
must satisfy 
and hence 
f(x, y, z, t) = g(x- VI, y, z), 
~=-V!)_ ot ox · 
(67.6) 
(67.7) 
The general problern of the invariance of steady motion with respect to change 
of observer is discussed in Sect. 146. 
68. Geometrically restricted motions. Various special kinds of motion are 
defined by special properties of the velocity field. 
1 Jn the early hydrodynamics of NEWTON, the BERNOULLIS, D'ALEMBERT, etc., andin 
EuLER's treatments published prior to 1760, the velocity was taken as a primitive concept 
rather than being defined in terms of particle motion. 
Sect. 69. Velocity at a boundary. 329 
If the velocity is constant over each member of a family of parallel planes, 
and normal to those planes, the motion is lineal 1 
(68.1) 
where the above-mentioned planes are the surfaces x1 = const. In a pseudolineal motion of the first kind, (68.1) is generalized by 
ii = ii (or, t), .xz = _i3 = o; (68.2) 
in a pseudo-lineal motion of the second kind, by 
~ =~(x , t). (68.3) 
A motion is said tobe plane 2 if its velocity field isaplane field and hence representable in the form (App. 33.6) with the surfaces x3 = const being a family of 
parallel planes. In kinematical terms, along every line in a certain direction the 
velocity is constant and normal to that direction. If either of the two requirements (App. 33.6)1, 2 or (App.33.6) 3 is removed, but the other retained, the motion 
is called pseudo-plane. Fora pseudo-plane motion of the first kind 3, 
(68.4) 
for a pseudo-plane motion of the second kind, 
ik = ik (x1, x2, t), k = 1, 2, 3. (68.5) 
A motion is said to be rotationally symmetric if its velocity field is a rotationally symmetric field and hence representable in the form (App. 33.6) with 
the surfaces x3 = const being a family of co-axial planes. 
In plane and rotationally symmetric motion, we shall follow the custom, 
obviously general enough, of restricting attention to a single plane, x3 = 0, say, 
which may be called the plane of motion. For interpretation, however, it is 
necessary to add a third dimension, this being achieved for a plane motion by 
translating the plane of motion normal to itself; for a rotationally symmetric 
motion, by rotating the plane of motion about the axis. 
The idea of plane motion is easily generalized. The plane of motion may 
be replaced by any curved surface, x3 = 0, upon which x1 and x2 may be any 
curvilinear Co-ordinates. The equations xk=xk(xl, x2), k=1, 2, now describe 
a strictly two-dimensional motion. To generate a three-dimensional motion 
in a region of space near the surface x3 = 0, choose a co-ordinate system in which 
the surface x3 = const are surfaces parallel to x3 = 0, while the surfaces x1 = const 
and x2 = const are those swept out by the normals to x3 = 0 along the x1 and x2 
co-ordinate curves upon it. 
Properties of some of these motions will be developed in Sect. 160. 
69. Velocity at a boundary. A boundary is a surface which the material does 
not cross. A necessary but not sufficient condition that ~ be a boundary is that 
1 In the period 1650 to 1 7 50 most studies of fluid motion rested upon the "hypothesis 
of parallel sections", which supposes that (68.1) holds approximately even in tubes of varying 
cross-section. 
2 Both plane and rotationally symmetric motions first appear fairly explicitly in the 
work of D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, § 73: §§ 43-48]. Plane motion is more or less implied 
in some parts of earlier hydrodynamic studies by NEWTON, D. BERNOULLI, EULER, and 
other writers. 3 The terminology follows BERKER [1936, 2, §§ 14-17], who defines also similar generalizations of rotationally symmetric motion. 
330 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 70· 
upon it the normal component of velocity be equal to the normal velocity Vn of d: 
• - 'k • - Xn = X nk = Pn - Vn. (69.1) 
For the theory, Vn is regarded as assigned. If 
Vn = 0 on 6, (69.2) 
the boundary 6 is stationary in the frame considered; otherwise, it is moving. 
A boundary surface may be a rigid surface or a deforming surface. 
If not merely the normal component but rather the velocity vector itself 
is prescribed on a surface "· the material is said to adhere to d: 
~ =p =V on 6. 
If 
v = 0 on "· 
(69.3) 
(69.4) 
then 6 is a stationary boundary to which the material adheres. When the boundary "is in rigid rotation at angular velocity w, we have v = b + w X p and hence 
(69.1) and (69.3) become, respectively, 
Xn = Pn = bn + n. (1) X p, 
~ = p = b + w X p. 
(69.5) 
(69.6) 
70. Path lines, stream Iines, and streak lines. The curve in space traversed 
by X as t varies is the path line 1 of X. The vector lines (Sect. App. 29) of the field ~ 
at time t are the stream lines. The streak line through ~ at time t is the locus 
at time t of all particles which at any time, past or future, will occupy or have 
occupied the place ~- In equations, we have 
Path line of the particle X: 
~ = ~(X, t) , X fixed, - oo < t < oo; 
also, the integral curve of the system 
which passes through X at t = t0• 
Stream lines at time t: 
Integral curves 
of the system 
dxk =ikdt 
dx1 : dx2 : dx3 = i 1 : i 2 : i 3 , t = const. 
Streak lines: 
(70.1) 
(70.2) 
(70.3) 
(70.4) 
Write the motion (66.1) in the form~ =f(X, t), X =F(~. t). Then the streak 
line through ~ at time t is given parametrically by the locus of x, where 
X= f(F(~. t'), t), - oo < t' < oo. (70.5) 
At a given place ~ and time t, the stream line through ~. the path line of 
the particle occupying ~. and the streak line through ~ all have a common tangent. When the motion is steady, all three curves coincide, but in general for 
unsteady motions they are distinct. 
From the assumption of Sect. 65, a stream line never crosses itself nor ends, except 
possibly at a stagnation point. The possible singular behavior of stream lines may be read 
1 D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, §§ 36-39], EuLER [1757, 2, § 67]. Cf. also EuLER [1745, 2, 
Chap. Il, Satz 1, Anm. 3]. 
Sect. 71. Path lines, stream lines, and streak lines. 331 
off from weil known theorems on differential systems of the type (70.4). By relaxing the 
assumption of Sect. 65 so as to permit more liberal behavior of j: at isolated points, more 
elaborate singularities for the stream lines may be obtained 1. Since the stream lines arc 
determined at a fixed instant, such singularities may be generated or destroyed in the course 
of time. The path lines and streak lines of an unsteady motion may cross themselves or 
double back upon themselves. 
Torender trajectories in the motion of a fluid visible, the commonest technique, 
firstmentioned byLEONARDODA VrNCI (1452-1519)2, is to cast small discernible 
foreign objects upon or within it, the result being kept most easily by a photograph. A long time exposure of a fluid in which a single such object has been 
injected records the path line of a particle. An instantaneous exposure of a fluid 
into which the objects are being injected continuously at one place shows a 
portion of the streak line through that place at that time. A short time exposure 
of a fluid onto whose surface many objects have just previously been dropped 
shows the direction field of x, whence the stream lines follow by a graphical 
integration 3. 
A vector sheet (Sect. App. 29) of the velocity field is a stream sheet. Any 
congruence of stream lines sweeps out a stream sheet 4 • 
From (70.2) and the general theory of ordinary differential equations, we sec 
that any non-vanishing field v which satisfies a Lipschitz condition may be 
regarded as the velocity field of a motion, at least in a sufficiently small region. 
In particular, any differentiable congruence of curves may serve as stream 
lines for infinitely many different motions of a continuous medium. Thus the 
vector lines of the electric field E or the magnetic intensity B may be regarded 
as stream lines; indeed, the whole of the theory of vector fields may be visualized 
in terms of motions of a continuous medium. It has seemed to us more economical to follow the opposite course, referring to the Appendix, "Invariants ", 
for most properties of motions of continuous media: that are obvious interpretations of general theorems on vector fields. 
71. Examples of line systems. For a mathematical example, consider the 
plane motion whose spatial description is 
• X X=--
1 + t ' y=1. (71.1) 
By intcgrating (70.4) for this case we get 
y + C 2 = ( 1 + t) log I i~l (71.2) 
as an equation for the stream lines; equivalently, a parametric equation for the 
stream line through ;r0 at time t is 
(71.3) 
1 ZHUKOVSKI [1876, 7, Gl. II]. For the centrally important case of homogeneaus motion 
(Sect. 142), these singularities were classified into 19 types and illustrated by PoLUBARINOVA 
[1929, 6]. Cf. also STEPHANSEN [1903, 16], HESSELBERG and SVERDRUP [1914, 5], DIETZ!US 
[1918, 2]. 2 [1889, 4, MS F, ff. 34v, 44r]. 
3 Following a vague hint of FARADAY [1831, J], ROEVER [1914, 10] constructed a machirre 
for visualizing stream lines. It consists in two slotted wheels rotating with different angular 
speeds about different axes. RoEVER analysed only special cases and did not give the design 
of the slots to represent a given stream field. According to LAMPE [1922, 5], a similar idea 
was employed by DovE in 1859 to 1860. We make no attempt to discuss the numerous 
physical analogies for stream lines, since they presuppose constitutive equations. 4 RIABOUCHINSKY [ 1938, 11] has suggested the use of two independent families of stream 
sheets, F1 = const and F2 = const, along with a third family of independent functions G so 
as to obtain a representation j:=±(G, F1 , F2 , 1). Cf. Sect. 136. 
332 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 71. 
By integrating (70.2), we get the material description: 
X= X(1 + t), (to= 0). (71.4) 
By eliminating t from (71.4) we get the path line of the partic_le X: 
X- X y = X(1- Y). (71. 5) 
Each particle moves in a straight line at constant speed, but the stream lines 
change in time according to (71.2). To get the streak line through x, y when 
t =0 we need only hold x, y fixed in (71.5): 
XY-X(y+1)+x=O. (71.6) 
This is a hyperbola. To get the streak line through x, y at timet, we first invert 
(71.4) at time t': 
X=-x1 + t' ' y =y-t'. (71.7) 
This gives the particle which occupies the place x, y at time t'. The place x, y 
occupied by this particle at timet follows from (71.4): 
y = y +t-t', (71.8) 
or the curve 
X y - X ( 1 + y + t) + X ( 1 + t) = 0, (71.9) 
again a hyperbola, including (71.6) as the special case t = 0. These results are 
illustrated in Fig. 10. 
A physically more typital and mathematically more difficult example of 
plane motion was worked out by MAXWELL1. In the plane of motion, let r, () 
be polar CO-ordinates and let the contravariant Velocity COmponents r, Ö be given 
by 
; = - V ( 1 - :n cos 0' r ö = V ( 1 + ::) sin 0 I (71.1 0) 
where V and a are constants. For the stream lines, integration of (70.4) yields 
( 1 - ::) r sin 0 = const. (71.11) 
Hence r=a is a stream line, and as r-+oo we have X-+- V, y-+0, so that 
(71.10) represents a steady motion at speed V past a circular cylinder. The 
stream lines (71.11) are drawn in Fig. 11. 
Now consider this same motion as apparent to an observer for whom the 
material is at rest at oo, the cylinder in motion with the velocity V along the 
x axis from - oo to + oo. The appropriate velocity field is obtained by adding 
1 [1870, 5]. The analysis had been initiated by RANKINE [1864, 2, § 18], who determined 
the radius of curvature of the path lines corresponding to certain fields of stream lines which 
he called "oögenous neo!ds". In obtaining the special case cited in the next footnote, RANKINE observed that the corresponding path line is a looped elastica and gave a sketch of its 
form. 
The path lines for flow within an ellipsoid were obtained by KELVIN [1885, 8] (according 
to LARMOR [note, p. 197 of the 1910 reprint of [1885, 8]], the analysis had been given in substance earlier, probably by FERRERS, in the Cambridge examinations); for flow past a sphere 
and past two parallel rectilinear vortices, by RIECKE [1888, 8]; for flow araund or within 
certain rotating prisms, by MoRTON [ 1913, 7]. Cf. also MoRTON and VINT [1915, 4]. These 
problems have been considered afresh by DARWIN [1953. 7]. All these flows are examples 
of isochoric irrotational motion, a general class which will be defined in Sect. 88. 
Sect. 71. Examples of line systems. 333 
Fig. 10a-e. (a) Stream lines of the velocity field (71.1) at t = 0, with Cz = o and C 1 as indicated. (b) Stream lines of 
the velocity field (71.1) at t= 1, with Cz=O and Ct as indicated. (c) Path lines of the particles (X, Y) for the velocity 
field (71.1). (d) Initial streak lines, i.e., loci at I= 0 of all particles ever occupying the place (x, y), for the velocity field 
(71.1). (e) Path line of the particle (1, 1); stream line at t = 0 and initial streak line through the place (1, 1 ), for the 
velocity field (71.1). 
)34 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
the components r =V cosO, r Ö =-V sinO, to {71.10), so thatl 
• a2 
r =V 2 cos 0, r 
Sect. 71. 
{71.12) 
where, as before, the origin of r and 0 is the center of the circular cross-section, 
now moving. To sketch the motion, note that the concentric circles r = const 
are curves of equal speed, while, since yfi ~tan20, the angle of the velocity 
vector at x is twice the azimuth angle. The stream lines are the circles 
sin 0 ~- = const, r {71.13) 
shown in Fig. 12. This stream field is said to be that induced by a doublet. The 
circle r = a is no Ionger a stream line. The motion is not steady in the frame of 
Fig. 11. Stream 1ines of steady isochoric potential 
flow past a circular cylinder. 
Fig. 12. Stream lines of the same flow as apparent to an 
observer for whom the material is at rest at oo. 
reference presently employed. At a later instant, the cylinder will have moved, 
and the stream field will be similar to the present one but centered upon the 
new position of the cylinder. Note the entire difference between Figs. 11 and 12, 
both representing the same motion, but the former as apparent to an observer 
for whom the cylinder is stationary, the latter to an observer for whom the material 
is stationary at oo. In Part g of this subchapter we shall determine in full 
generality the apparent differences induced by the motion of an observer. 
Our problern is to obtain the path lines corresponding to {71.12). This was 
done somewhat indirectly by MAXWELL; we shall follow a direct attack by 
DARWIN 2, which has in common with MAXWELL's analysis the use of r, 0 in 
their previous meanings as radial distance and azimuth from the center of the 
moving cylinder. Thus by {71.11) we get 
(1 - -"2_) y = y Y~ m ' {71.14) 
where Y is the material co-ordinate and where for given Y the quantity Ym 
is the maximum value of y, namely, the value of y when the cylinder is abreast 
of the particle. From (71.14) 2 we have2(Ym-Y)=j!Y2 +4a2 if Y~O, whence 
1 RANl{INE [1864, 2, Eq. (17)]. 2 [1953, 7, § 2]. 
Sect. 71. Examples of line systems. 335 
Ym > a if Y >O, expressing the fact that each particle moves aside sufficiently 
to let the cylinder pass by. Equivalent to (71.12) is the system 
• a2 . y =V 2 sm20. r (71.15) 
From (71.10} 2 and (71.14h follows 
Ö= 5_ (1 + ~) = __!"__ VY2 + 4a2 sin2 0 y2 y2 y2 ' (71.16) 
and hence from (71.15) 
dx a2 cos 20 dy a2 sin 20 
-dO- t:Y2+4ä2sin20 ' dii VY2+4a2sin20 ' (71.17} 
where Y is kept constant. Ast varies from - oo to + oo, the parameter 0 varies 
from 0 to :n;. In the notation of Jacobian elliptic functions, put 
k __ 2a ll 
cos u = - sn v,. 
VY2+4a2 ' (71.18) 
so that the range of the parameter v is -K(k) to +K(k). By integrating (71.17) 
we get the equations of the paths 1 in terms of the parameter v: 
y(v) = Y + -~- (dnv- k'), l 
x(v) =X+-~ [(1- ~ k2) (v + K)- E (am v)- Ej. 
(71.19) 
To get the corresponding times, we observe directly from (71.15) and (71.16) that 
d • l -di ( x - y cot 0) = - i sec 2 0 + y cs::2 0 0, 2 (71.20) = - V-a + V (1 + a2_)· = V. 
y2 y2 ' 
hence 
V t = x - y cot 0, (71.21) 
where t = 0 corresponds to x = 0, 0 = t n, y = Ym. 
Thus the cylinder drives the particles ahead and, except for those situate 
upon its course, aside. In so doing it causes each particle not directly before 
or behind it to traverse a loop which is symmetrical about a line normal to the 
path of the cylinder. The maximumnormal displacement dm, which occurs when 
the cylinder is abreast of the particle, follows from (71.14) 2 : 
(71.22) 
The greatest such displacement, dm =a, results from the limit Y --*0, showing 
that the particles nearest the cylinder's path are those most pushed aside, yet 
in amount barely sufficient to let the cylinder by, while if Y = 0 the particle 
is carried straight along ahead or behind the cylinder. Each path is a loop. For 
very distant particles, it is approximately a small circle of radins a2/2 Y. When 
the cylinder is gone past, each particle has suffered a permanent forward displacemen t dt, the amoun t of w hich ma y be read off from ( 71.19) 2 : 
dt=x(K)-X= 2
ka [(1--}k2)K -E], (71.23) 
1 As was shown by RANKINE [1864, 2, § 18], the curvature of the path line is 4 (y- t Y)fa2• 
A very simple expression for the path in terms of arc length was obtained by HAVELOCK 
[1913, 3]. Cf. also MILNE-THoMSON [1938, 9, .§ 9.211. 
336 
Fig. 13 a. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
",.,.,.- -........ / --~-- ....... 
a 
/ / / / 
----
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yz I 
I 
I 
Fig.13 b. 
Sect. i1. 
----- Fig. 13 a. MAXWELL'S sketch of the path.; of the particles which at t = - oo were situatfd upon a line perpendicular to the 
direction of motion. 
Fig. 13b. DARWtN's accurate drawing of particle paths. The broken lines at left and right are the loci at t = 'f oo of the 
particles which are abreast of the cylinder as its center crosses the centralline of the drawing. The numbers indicate 
the times of passage to the points marked, in units in which the cylinder moves a distance a. 
. I I ' I I . I I I . . I I I I 
I . . . I I I I I I n I I I I I I I I I 
. . : I I I 
I . I I ~ \ t I . +-Ii" I l J I~ . I I 
1--- i \ 
\\\\~'""' \\ \~ ...-: ~~ \ 
"""'"'"" ~ 7 ". ~~:~, ~ \ \ \ 
---------~~ -- ~1 I - -- - -- -------- ------;-;--/7 -~~ ~Vr- ~- ~- -~-- -------
1117~ I I I 
1 
111!/. f--t-./7 
I -r-, r--~ I 1 I .I I I -"!-I t+-: I I lf-+t-+ I 
I I I I I I I I I I 
. I I I I I I I I . . I . I I I I I I I I I I I I I ' I 
' I I I l I I ' I 
. I I I I I I I 
~ I ! ~ I I I 
Fig. 13 c. MAXWELL's sketch of the potential flow past a cylinder. One set of heavy lines are the stream lines of Fig. 11. The other set are the present loci of the particles which at timet= - oo were situated upon perpendiculars. 
and for particles near the path of the cylinder this is approximately a [log (8a/Y) 
-2]. 
MAXWELL's and DARWIN's drawings of this motion are reproduced as Fig. 13. 
Sect. 72. Material derivative. 337 
b) Material systems. 
72. Material derivative. In the common frame, Jet A::: be a tensor expressed 
as a function of Z and t only. Then the partial derivative oA:Jot is the rate of 
change of A::: apparent to an observer situate upon the moving particle Z. For 
general co-ordinates X, we write 
DA::: _ aA::: (X. t) I ~ = ~-ot-- x~const' (72.1) 
but this formula docs not in general define a tensor. Now consider the double 
tensor A =A(x, X, t), x and X being general co-ordinates. Then the tensor 
dA:Jdt, or A:::, defined by 
dA"'···flk ... m • oA··· [ oA··· { k} y ... 6n ... p = A"' = _ ... + _ .. ._ + Aa; ... ßr ... m+ ••. _ \ dt ... ot oxq qr y ... bn ... p 
-- {;JA~:J~:::P'- ... J_iq, 
= aA::: + A" .. iq 
(it ... 'q ' 
(72.2) 
is the material derivative 1 of A:::. In (72.2), A":: is a function of x, X, and t, 
and ofot is executed with both x and X held constant, while ofoxq is executed 
with t, all xk except xq, and X all held constant. The field x is regarded as given. 
If we suppose x and X related through a motion x =X (X, t), X =X(x, t), with x 
obtained from (67.1), then (72.2) is an invariant time derivative whose value 
is independent of whether x be replaced by x (X, t) in some or all of its occurrences 
in A:::. There are two major special cases. First, when the material description 
is employed, we have A =A (X, t), and (72.2) becomes 
dA~·:J~·::.p = A_rz ... ßk ... m = __DA~:J!~_::_t + [{ k} Aa; ... ßr ... m + _l dt y ... bn ... p Dt qr y ... bn ... p '· • 
(72.3) 
_ { r }Acx ... ßk ... m_,,.Jxq· nq y ... 6r ... p ' 
in this case, Ais the intrinsic derivative of A with respect to the field x. Second, 
when the spatial description is employed, we have A =A (x, t), and (72.2) becomes 
dA::: = A.· .. = oA::~ + A" .. iq or A = o~At + x · gradA, (72.4) at ... ot ... ,q • u 
where 
iJA::: __ aA:::(;r, t) I 8t - == __ O_t __ z~const ' (72.5) 
The essential term A:::, q xq in (72.4) is called the convection of A. Its non-linearity gives rise to many of the celebrated difficulties of hydrodynamics. 
We have introduced two notations, dfdt and a superposed dot, to stand for 
the material derivative. Except for rather complicated expressions, we shall 
1 The concept of material derivative and the formula (72.2)a in the common frame were 
used implicit!y by EULER [1770, 1, § 6] and LAGRANGE [1783, 1, §§ 10-11] [1788, 1, Part Il, 
§ 11, ~~ 11-12] and were formalized by CousiN [1786, 1, § 1], PIOLA [1836, 1, §VII, 
~ 77] [1848, 2, ~ 14], and STOKES [1845, 4, § 5] [1851, 2, § 49], with the notations ojot, 
', and D/Dt, respectively. In the classicalliterature general results are usually derived in the 
common frame, where there is no distinction between the Operators denoted in the present 
work by D/Dt and d/dt, but in the cz.ses concerning rates of change along a curved path the 
classical notation D/Dt often really stands for what we here call dfdt. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bel. Ill/1. 22 
338 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 72. 
prefer to use the dot, whose extent of application will be indicated by an overbar 
rather than parentheses, thus: 
A.IY. d (AIY.) ,k = dt ,k' Ä ~k - ( d:tfY. L . j 
A; bk - d (AIY. bk) t k cm = dt k cm, e c. 
(72.6) 
Since 
~ A".. _ ( aA:::) at ... ,k- ot ,k' (72.7) 
from (72.2) we get the commutation rule 
d A... (dA:::) _ A... ·m dt ... ,k- -----;{/ ,k-- ... ,mx,k. (72.8) 
This refers to the partial covariant derivative with respect to the spatial Coordinate xk. 
No simple rule holds, in general, for the partial covariant derivative with respect to the 
material co-ordinate XIY.. Recalling that in (72.2) ofot is executed with both x and X held 
constant, we have for the total covariant derivative (App. 20.2) the following commutation 
rule: 
(72.9) 
This holds for double fields A(x, X, t), but in carrying out the operation on the left we must 
regard A as a function of X and t only, and in carrying out the operation on the right we 
must regard x as a function of X and t only. To prove this rule, it suffices to establish it 
in the common frame. Verification in general co-ordinates is possible but more elaborate, 
requiring use of a commutation rule for the derivatives of the Christofiel symbols which 
follows from the vanishing of the Riemann tensor. 
Also, from (App. 20.3), (App. 20.4), and the fact that the co-ordinate system is 
stationary, we get 
(72.10) 
In problems of motion, it is unnecessary and often inconvenient to consider 
double fields A::: (x, X, t) as such. Henceforth we adopt the convention that 
either the material or the spatial description will be used, but not a mixture of both. 
That is, the tensor A::: will always be assumed a function of X and t, or a function 
of x and t, but not a function of x, X, and t. This occasions no loss in generality 
and results in economy of description. E.g. when we write A:,ßk we think of 
A;:' as a function of X and t to get A:,ß, then of A:,ß as a function of x and t 
to get (A:,ß),k· The two different partial time derivatives are then distinguished 
by the notations (72.1) and (72.5). Alsoweshall employ only the partial covariant 
derivatives ", k" and ",IX" rather than the total covariant derivative, and for 
uniformity of notation we set 
oxk 
Xk -xk _ ,cx= ;cx= oxa.' 
where t is held constant. 
X IY. -XIY.- oXIY. ' ' k= ·k=~k' uX (72.11) 
Under the foregoing conventions, the commutation rules (72.7) and (72.8) 
hold a fortiori, but (72.9) does not generallyhold if the total covariant derivative 
is replaced by the ordinary covariant derivative 1. However, for a purely material 
field viewed in the material description we have 
ÄIY. ... tJ -AIY. ... ß y ... d,e- y ... lJ,e ' (72.12) 
1 TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 18]. 
Sects. 73. 74. Material surfaces. 339 
as follows from (72.3), whence it is equally plain th~t this rule cannot be extended 
to non-trivially double fields: A_<X ... fik ... m =f= A" ... flk ... m , in contradistinction to y ... 6p ... q,e y ... 6 p ... q,e 
(72.9). 
If Ä= 0, the quantity A is said to be substantially constant. I.e., a substantially constant quantity is a function of X only. 
The material derivative is sometimes called the "substantial derivative". 
In a steady motion, if Ä = 0 we obtain from (72.2), (67.5) and {72.7) 
o = a~~:~ = ~t [ a~;:: + A:::.k;k] = :t ( a~~:~) + ( a~~:: t :/, l (72.13) oA'" 
=-----et-· 
That is, in a steady motion the local rate of change of a substantially constant function is also 
substantially constant. 
73. Material systems. A manifold consisting of a set of particles is said to 
be material. The set of places occupied by a material manifold at time t is its 
conliguration at time t. 
A curve 
X"=X"(S) 
is a material line; its configuration at time t is given by 
xk(S, t) =xk(X1 (5), X 2 (5), X3 (5), t), 
where ;r =;r (X, t) is the motion (66.1) 1 . 
Similarly, a material surlace is defined by 
or, alternatively, 
X"=X"(L,M), 
F(X) =0; 
the corresponding configurations are given by 
;r=;r(X(L,M),t), F(X(;r,t))=O. 
A material volume is a region of particles. 
A single particle is sometimes called a material point. 
(73 .1) 
(73.2) 
(73 .J) 
(73.4) 
(73.5) 
74. Material surfaces. From (73.4), (72-3), and (72.4) follows Lagrange's 
criterion1 : A necessary and sullicient condition lor the surlace I (;r, t) = 0 to be 
material is 
I
. of . dl ot 1 'k = - +;r · gra =-+ x = 0 at ot ,k • (74.1) 
By constructing a geometrical interpretation 2 for i, we can make (74.1) 
entirely plausible from the spatial standpoint. Let a typical point upon a moving 
surface f (;r, t) = 0 be endowed with a certain velocity u, not necessarily the velocity iJ of the particle instantaneously occupying that point. If, continually 
observing this point on the surface as it moves, we differentiate the equation 
1 [1783, 1, §§ 10-11] [1788, 1, Part II, § 11, ~ 12]. LAGRANGE's proof of sufficiency 
rests on the method of characteristics. 
2 KELVIN [1848, 5]. 
22* 
340 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
f = 0 with respect to time, we obtain 
of I k- ae+,ku-0. 
Sect. 7 5. 
(74.2) 
Now the length of the projection of u onto the normal to I= 0 is given by 
(74-3) 
Hence from (74.2) follows 
of 
ot Un=- • Vf,mf•m (74.4) 
But the length of the projection of the particle velocity ;C onto the normal to 
I =0 is 
Xn=xk l,k 
Vt,mf·m 
Comparing (74.4), (74.5), and (72.4) yields 
j = Vl,ml'm (.in- Un), 
(74.5) 
(74.6) 
an assertion that at a Point upon the surlace I= 0, I is proportional to the speed 
ol Propagation, relative to the surlace, ol the particle instantaneously situate thereon. 
Consequently LAGRANGE's criterion (74.1) is a statement that at a given instant 
the normal component of the particle motion relative to the surface I= 0 is zero. 
The ideas suggested here will be generalized in Sects. 177 and 182 to 183. 
In the spatial description, when the velocity field :i: is a given smooth function of place 
and time, it does not always yield a continuous motion in the sense of Sect. 65. The motion 
(66.1) is to be found by an integration (cf. Sect. 70) and may possess singularities. For 
example, it may not always be possible, throughout all parts of space where x is defined, 
to determine corresponding particles X. Little is known about such singularities. An iso]ated 
result was asserted by SoMOFF1 : A surface which envelopes path-lines is also an envelope of 
successive spatial configurations of a single material surface. The proof of SaMOFF is purely 
formal. First, a necessary condition that in the motion ;r = ;r (X, t) the surface F(X) = 0 
be an envelope of paths is that there exist non-zero solutions ax-x of the system 
Hence 
By (17.3) follows 
(74.7) 
(74.8) 
(74.9) 
On the other hand, Iet F(X) = 0 be a material surface. lts configurations in space are then 
F(X(;r, t)) = 0, so that a condition for these to possess an evelope is 
(74.10) 
If I ;rfXI =I= 0, (74.9) and (74.10) are identical. This completes the argument of SoMoFF. 
It is inadequate in that it consists merely in showing that a necessary condition for one type 
of singular surface is necessary also for another. Sufficient conditions do not appear easy 
to establish. 
75. Material vector lines. If a curve is given by the equations F(x, t) = O, 
G (x, t) = 0, for that curve to be a material line it is obviously sufficient, but 
not necessary, that F =0 and G =0. A more convenient criterion can be expressed in terms of the representation (73 .1), or of any field of tangents to the 
1 [1885. 7]. 
Sect. 76. Material derivative of the elements of arc, surface, and volume. 341 
curve. Equivalently we may consider a field c (~. t) and find a necessary and 
sulficient condition that the vector lines of c be material lines. 
At the instant t, let c be a vector line of c, and for an interval about t Iet 
~ =~ (L, t') be the material line rc which coincides with c at the timet. Since rc 
is a materialline, we have by (/2.9) 
-; oxm] _ "[k ox~ + [k "ml oxP c oL - c oL c x,p oL · (75 .1) 
By (App. 29.1h, if rc is to remain a vector line of c we must have 
(75.2) 
Since rc is a vector line of c at the instant t, we have at that instant 
oxk 
oL = ac", (75. 3) 
where a is a scalar. Hence, combining (75.1), (75.2), and (75-3), we conclude 
that a necessary condition for rc, once being a vector line of c, to remain so, is 
(75 .4) 
This is the Helmholtz-Zorawski criterion1• To see that it is sufficient, note 
that if it is satisfied then c["8xmlj8L is a quantity initially zero whose time 
derivative, when Xis kept constant, is also zero. 
Equivalent to (75.4) is 
cr"(acml-ai:f}cP)=O, or cx(ac-ac·gradp)=O, (75.5) 
where a is any non-vanishing quantity, not necessarily constant. This form 
indicates that the result is invariant when c is replaced by ac, as is geometrically 
obvious. Also equivalent to (75 .4) is 
c X [~'f +curl(c X p) +pdivc] =0. 
By putting c=p in (75.6) we get 
"[k oimJ - x ot - o, . oft 
px ae=o, or, equivalently, ---- oft = c ( ) . ~ t p ot ' ' 
(75.6) 
(75.7) 
as necessary and sufficient that the stream lines be material, whence follows 
the theorem that the stream lines and the path lines coincide if and only if they 
are steady (cf. Sect. 70). Motions in which (75.7) is satisfied are called motions 
with steady stream lines. 
76. Material derivative of the elements of arc, surface, and volume. The fundamentallemma for this section is 
x" =i" =i" xm ,Cl ,a. ,m ,IX" (76.1) 
1 lt was implicit in the analysis of HELMHOLTZ [1858, J, § 2] and NANSON [1874. 5[ 
but was first explicitly stated by ZoRAWSKI [1900, 11]. The present proof isthat of TRUESDELL and PRIM [1947, 18] [1950, 24]. Üthers were given by LAMPARIELLO [1938, 6] and 
CASTOLDI [1950, 4]. 
342 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 76. 
To prove it, we write the sequence of identities 
-T _ d ( oxk) _ D ( oxk) { k } oxP •m 
x ... =(jj ax" =ne ax" + pm oX"x' 
oik { k } oxP ·m 'k 'k 
= aX~ + pm -oX" X =X;<> =X·"' (76.2) 
_ [ oi':_ + { k }xm] oxP _ _ik xm - oxP pm oX"- ,m •"' 
which follow from (72.3), (72.1), (App. 20.2), our convention in Sect. 72, and 
(App. 22.4). 
By differentiating the identity x~" X~m = 15~ and using (76.2) we get also 
X" X" Xß 'm X" ·m k = - m kX·ß = - mX k • , ' , ' ' J 
From (20.3) and (76.1} we have1 
From (20.6} 4 follows similarly 
equivalently 2, 
We set 
(76.3) 
(76.4) 
(76.5) 
(76.6) 
(76.7) 
(the notation Id will be motivated in Sect. 83). The rule for differentiating a 
determinant gives 
1 ;.viXI = x~~x~k I ;.vJXI = i~m x:n .. x~k I ;.vJXI, l (76.8) 
= Id I ;.vjXI, 
where we have used (76.1). Equivalent formulae are 
j = Id], dv = Iddv =i\dv; (76.9) 
the former follows from (16.5) and (72.10h, the latter, from (20.9). The quantity 
Id is called the expansion and is of fundamental importance. Each of the results 
(76.8) and (76.9) as well as the equivalent forms 
. . Id =i~k = divp =log J = logdv (76.10} 
is called Euler's expansion formula 3. An equivalent form involving an 
arbitrary function B such that B ·= 0 is the spatial equation of continuity: 
log.Bj + Id = 0, or o(:/) + div (Bjp) = 0 .. (76.11) 
Any quantity of the form B j, where B = 0, is called a density for the motion. 
The properties of such functions are developed in Subchapter III. 
1 EDLER [1761, 2, §§ 13, 55] [1757, 2, § 11]. 2 LAMB [1877, 4]. 3 [1757. 2, §§ 10-15] [1770, 1, § 14] [1862, 4, § 156]. 
Sect. 77. Isochoric motion; steady motion with steady density. 
Since div(pp)=P+Pifl, by (App.26.1) 2 we have1 
Jpdv = ~da·pp- fplttdv. V 4 V 
343 
(76.12) 
This identity, an alternative form of (76.10}, expresses the total velocity in a region by means 
of the normal velocity Pn on the boundary and the expansion ltt at interior points. 
The formulae of this section make it plain that from the velocity gradient 
tensor .i~m the material rates of change of all elements of arc, surface, and volume 
are determined. Pursuit of this idea fumishes the subject of Part c of this subchapter. 
77. Isochoric motion; steady motion with steady density. A motionsuchthat 
the volume occupied by any material region is unaltered, however that region 
may change its shape in the course of time, is isochoric (cf. Sect. 40). By (76.9) 
follows as a local and instantaneous condition for isochoric motion Euler's 
criterion 2 : 
(77.1) 
That is, a motion is isochoric if and only if its velocity field is solenoidal. From the 
theorem of HELMHOL TZ in Sect. App. 31 we conclude that a motion is isochoric if 
and only if, at any given instant, the strength of each stream tube is the same at all 
of its cross sections. This assertion was taken, in one form or another, as the 
defining expression of the principle of continuity in hydrodynamic researches 
before 1752 3 and is still in frequent use in engineering treatments. Of course, 
it is but a special case of the defining property of a solenoidal field, which in 
the present connection assumes the following form: A motion is isochoric if and 
only if the flux of velocity out of every reducible closed surface is zero: 
~da·p=O. (77.2) 
' 
Since steady motion is defined by (67.5) alone, in a steady motion the quantity f need not be steady. However, by (76.10) the quantity logf is steady. 
Moreover, if B is any steady quantity which is constant on each stream line, 
we have B = 0, and also 
div (i B p) = i jJ · grad B + B div (i p) = 0. (77.3) 
From this formula and (76.11) we see that in a steady motion, by assigning the 
quantity B a constant value for each stream line we obtain a steady density i B. 
Since such a choice of B is not necessary, we distinguish the case when it is made 
by speaking of a steady motion with steady density. 
In two important cases, then, the velocity is proportional to a solenoidal field: 
1. Isochoric motion, in which p is solenoidal, 
2. Steady motion with steady density, in which Bfp is solenoidal. 
For these two classes of motion, we may read off from the results in 
Sects. App. 31 and App. 32 a sequence of special properties. These properties are 
extremely important, and it is only for economy that we refrain from repeating 
them here. 
1 MuNK [1936, 7]; more obscurely in [1922, 6]. 2 [1761, 2, § 36]. Special cases are due to D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, §§ 45, 73]. 
a E.g. NEWTON [1687, 1, Lib. II, Prop. XXXVI], D. BERNOULLI [1738. 1, Chap. 111, 
§ 2]. Perhaps the earliest recorded statementisthat of LEONARDO DA VINCI [1923, 5, Book 
VIII, §§ 37-43]. 
344 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 78. 
In particular, we emphasize (App.31.12), which gives the totalsquared speed 
m the isochoric case, the total of j 2 B2p2 in the steady case. 
In an isochoric motion with steady stream lines, we may take the divergence of (75.7) 3 , 
by (77.1) thus obtaining 
( 77.4) 
This is a statement that C = const on each stream line at each fixed time. But if we write 
i k = i: dk, where d is the field of unit tangent to the stream lines, we get 
ai~ = ai dk 
at at · 
since d is steady. By (75.7) 2 , therefore, 
whence 
__(l_l_og i = C. 
at 
(77.5) 
(77.6) 
(77.7) 
By (77.4) follows a theorem of CAUCHY 1 : In an isochoric motion with steady stream lines, 
8log ifot is constant on each stream line at each instant. The converse is not generally true. 
In fact, it is easy to show that in a motion with steady stream lines a necessary and sufficient condition that C be constant along each stream line at each fixed time is that Id/i: 
be steady. 
78. Invariant directions. If the element dx is to be instantaneously constant 
in direction, we must have 
dxm = kdxm, (78.1) 
where k is a real factor of proportionality, which may be zero. By (76.4) 2 follows 
(im - k om) dxP = 0 ,p p ' 
and hence 
det (k b;' - .i:p) = 0. 
(78.2) 
(78. 3) 
The analogy to (38.2) is immediate, and the analysis proceeds in the same way 
as in Sect. 38. 
First, since (78. 3) is a real cubic, we have at once the theorem of Bertrand 2 : 
In any motion, at each point there is at least one real direction suffering no instantaneous rotation. Second, let D be the discriminant of (78.)). Recalling from 
Sect. App. 37 that a complex proper nurober k cannot yield a real solution dx of 
(78.2), and that to distinct real proper numbers there correspond linearly independent real solutions dx, from the theory of cubic equations we obtain Cases 1 
and 2 of the following: 
1. If D>O, there are three and only three invariant directions. 
2. I f D < 0, there is one and only one invariant direction. 
3. If D =0, there may be one, two, three, or an infinite number of invariant 
directions. 
The additional possibilities in Case 3 are most easily seen by example. The 
condition D = 0 is requisite and sufficient for multiple proper numbers. In the 
rectilinear shearing motion .i = 0, y = x, i = 0, there is but the single proper 
nurober k =0, thrice repeated, and any material straight line initially parallel 
to the y-z plane is carried ever parallel to itself. In the motion .i = 0, y = x, i = z 
1 [1823, 2]. 2 [1867, 1]. 
Sect. 79. Kinematics of Jine integrals. 345 
the proper numbers are k = 0, 1, the former being double, and the only lines 
not being rotated are those parallel to the y axis or to the z axis. 
For D we have the following expression 1 : 
D =- 18Idl0 B- 4nB +I~ l0 2 - 4l03 - 27B2 , (78.4) 
where 
(78.5) 
While interpretation of the sign of D is difficult, ERICKSEN 2 has observed that 
the problern is simplified by introducing the deviator, vkm=xk m-tidö~. 
From (78.2) it is plain that dx is invariant with respect to ik "' if aild only if it 
is invariant with respect to vk m, the proper numbers for the latter being k- ~I d, 
where k is a root of (78.3). If we let D0 be the discriminant for vkm, then by 
(78.4) follows 
(78.6) 
where l00 and B0 are formed from vkm as are lO and B from i~m· Hence there 
are three distinct proper numbers, at least one multiple proper number, or one 
and only one real proper number according as 
(78.7) 
In particular, l00 > 0 is sufficient that D0 < 0 and hence that there be one and 
only one invariant direction, while l00<0 is necessary in orderthat D0 > 0 and 
hence that there be three distinct invariant directions. 
A kinematical interpretation for the sign of lO will be given in Sect. 91. 
Since ik m is generally not symmetric, the algebraic theorem of KELVIN and 
TAIT (Sect. 'App. 37) implies that in the case when three distinct invariant directions exist, they are not usually orthogonal. 
A condition that an instantaneously invariant direction shall remain invariant has been 
found by ZaRAWSKia. 
In ~rder that there exist an element of area which is instantaneously constant 4, we must 
have dak= o; by (76.6) follows 
(78.8) 
a statement that ld is a proper number of i"),. From the characteristic equation of i :'). 
follows the necessary and sufficient condition ' 
(78.9) 
79. Kinematics of line integrals. Definitions and conventions regarding line, 
surface, and volume integrals are given in Sects. App. 23 to App. 25 and Sect. 73. 
Let C(f be a materialline. Then for the rate of change of the flow of 'V along C(f we 
have 
1 TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 22]. 
2 [1955. 5]. 
3 [1900, 12]. 
{ 1
- J 'V dxk= J 'V dxk, (79.1) 
'W 'W 
4 BELTRAMI [1871, 1, § 9] found also conditions for (1) Iineal elements suffering pure 
rotation, (2) plane elements all directions in which are experiencing rates of change normal 
to one direction, (3) plane elements suffering no instantaueaus rotation. These last form a 
tetrahedron whose edges, possibly imaginary, are the directions determined by (78.2). 
346 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 80. 
since an equation for<6" is X=X(L) and thus the integral has fixed limits in the 
material description. Hence by (76.4) follows 
d~ J IV dxk= J ( ivdxk+ IV d~k), <'(/ <'(/ 
= j(\vdxk+~Vi~mdxm), (79.2) 
<'(/ 
= J ( \vdxk+ IV dxk), 
<'(/ 
results implicit in the analysis of KELVIN1 . 
On the other hand, for a spatialline c we have 
Tt o f d k_ r oW d k IV X-. 8tx. e e 
(79.3) 
Choosing the spatial line c which is the configuration at time t of the material 
line <6", from (79.2), (79.3), and (72.4) we obtain 
(79.4) 
80. Kinematics of surface integrals. For a spatial surface ~ we have 
~j~Vd km= r~d km ot a . ct a ' (80.1) 
but for a material surface Y' a more elaborate formula is necessary. By (76.5) 
we get 
(80.2) 
or, equivalently, 
-:ft I IV dak =I [W dak +IV(- x~ dam +i; dak)J. (80.3) 
g' g' 
When IV is a vector field c, this becomes a formula 2 for the rate of change of the 
flux of c through Y': 
:t {da·c= j'da·(c-c·gradp+cdivp). (80.4) 
g, g, 
A generalization is given in Sect. 277. 
From (80.4) follows Zorawski's criterion: In orderthat the flux of c across 
every material surface remain constant in time, it is necessary and sufficient that 
(80. 5) 
Equivalent forms are 
A],ck- A]ik cm = 0 ,m ' 
oc l ( . ) . d' ß( + cur c X p + p tv c = 0; (80.6) 
1 [1869, 7, §59(a)]. The general ;ormula is given by JAUMANN [1905, 2, §383] and 
SPIELREIN [1916, 5, § 29). 2 Cf. ZoRAWSKI [1900, 11], JAUMANN [1905, 2, § 383], ABRAHAM [1909, 1, § 2], SPIELREIN [1916, 5, § 29). 
Sects. 81, 82. The Stretching tensor of EuLER. 347 
in the former, which is a consequence of (76.9h, A is any substantially constant 
quantity. 
By comparing (80.5) with (75.4), we conclude that in order for the flux of c 
across every material surface to be constant in time, it is necessary but not sufficient 
that the vector lines of c be material. When (80.5) holds, the vector tubes of c 
arematerial tubes whose strength (Sect. App. 29) at any given cross-section remains 
constant as the motion proceeds. 
81. Kinematics of volume integrals. The transport theorem. Fora stationary 
volume v we have :t J IV dv = J~~ dv. (81.1} 
Fora material volume "/"", by (76.%, (72.4}, and (App. 26.1} 2 we getl 
:t f \V d V = f ( W + \V X~k) d V, 
-r -r 
= J[ ~~ + (\Vik),k] dv, 
-r 
= J ~~ dv+~Wikdak. -r 9' 
(81.2) 
Choosing the spatial volume v which at timet is the configuration of the material 
volume "Y, we derive the transport theorem2: 
~- J \V dv = ~t J \V dv + ~Wikdak = J ~';-dv + ~ \VXnda. (81. 3) 
-r " " 
Thus the rate of change of the total \V over a material volume "Y equals the rate of 
change of the total \V over the fixed volume v which is the instantaneous configuration 
of "Y, plus the flux of ~\V out of the bounding surface. The transport theorem is 
really an alternative statement of EuLER's expansion formula (76.10). 
The formula (81.3) expresses, for a given \V, a time derivative of an integral 
taken over a volume whose bounding surface is in motion at an arbitrary velocity 
;i. To consider a volume v(t) bounded by a surface 6(t) moving at a different 
velocity u, we need only imagine fictitious particles whose velocity is u. The 
result, then, is 
~~ f \V dv = r~a; dv +~\V uk dak, (81.4) 
v(t) v 
where dufdt indicates that the volume of integration is material with respect 
to the velocity u. By taking U=O or U=~. we recover (81.1) or (81.3). 
c) Stretching and spin. 
82. The stretching tensor of EuLER. Let d~1 and d~2 be material elements. 
Then by (72.10) and (76.4) we have 
gkmd~1dxB'=gkm(di~dxB'+dx1diB'), ) 
= ( •k d Pd m+ "md kd P) gkm X,p X1 Xg X,p x1 Xg , 
= 2dkmd~dxB', • 
(82.1) 
1 REYNOLDS [1903, 15, § 14), JAUMANN [1905, 2, § 383), SPIELREIN [1916, 5, § 29). 2 Asserted by REYNOLDS [1903, 15, § 14], proved by SPIELREIN [1916, 5, § 29], who 
gave numerous alternative forms and corollaries. 
348 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 82. 
where d is the symmetric stretching tensor or rate of deformation tensor of EULER: 
(82.2) 
By (82.1) it is plain that the tensor d serves to measure the instantaneous rat es 
of change of length and angle of material elements in the moving material. 
First, if d;x1 =d;x2 , (82.1) reduces to 
(82.3) 
or 
(82.4) 
If we write 
d(n) - lim J = lim log l l->0 l l-->0 (82.5) 
for the stretching [cf. Sect. 25, especially (25.5)] of a material line of length l 
emanating from ;x with unit tangent n, then we have from (82.4) 
d(n) = dkmnknm. 
In particular, if n points along the x1 co-ordinate curve, we have 
d dll 
(n) = -gll 
Second, if ~ is the angle between d;x 1 and d;x2 , from (82.1) we get 
- sin ~ ~ = 2dkm n1 n;'- cos ~ (d(n,) + d(n,)). 
(82.6) 
(82.7) 
(82.8) 
For ~ =0 this reduces to (82.4). If ~=j=O, (82.8) gives us the shearing, - ~, 
of the directions of d;x 1 and d;x 2 • For the case of orthogonal directions we get 
1 p d k m -21012 = kmnlnz. (82.9) 
We have shown, then, that in an orthogonal co-ordinate system the physical 
components of d equal the stretchings and the halves of the shearings in the co-ordinate 
directions: 
d(l) - t~12 
d(2) 
- t~/3 
-t~23 
d(3) 
The physical dimension of d is [T-1]; thus d is a pure rate. 
(82.10) 
The linearity of d in x is important: The stretchings and orthogonal shearings 
corresponding to the vector sum of two velocity fields are the sums of the stretchings 
and shearings of the two constituent fields. 
The results just given, as weil as those to follow in this part of the subchapter, 
could be derived by reinterpretation of the formulae concerning small deformation 
given in Part e of Subchapter I. Because of the definition of "small" there 
employed, there would be no loss of rigor in such a treatment. It seems to us 
clearer, however, to make the theory of rates of change entirely independent 
of the theory of finite strain. In so doing, in this section we have given a compact, modern version of the original argument of EuLER. The rather elaborate 
exact connection between stretching and rate of finite strain will be presented 
in Sect. 95. 
Sects. 82A, 83. The invariants of stretching. 349 
The rate of change of a material element of area is given by (76.6) and hence is not 
determined by the stretching alone. For the rate of change of the magnitude da, however, 
we readily calculate1 from (76.6), (82.2), and (82.6) 
(82.11) 
82A. Appendix. History of the theory of stretching and shearing. All the analysis just 
given, except for the last equation, is due to EuLER [1770, 1, §§ 9-12]. His form of the 
argument, based on consideration of the infinitesimal displacement :i: dt, is often given in 
engineering texts today. In reference to infinitesimal strain (cf. Sect. 33 A and Sect. 57), 
the material was re-created by CAUCHY [1823, 1] [1827, 2] [1828, 3], who added the contents 
of Sect. 83. Cf. also P!OLA [1836, 1, §VII,~~ 70-71]. All this was discussed afresh in 
terms of rates by STOKES [1845, 4, § 2], whose kinematical description is more immediate. 
The formula (82.4) in a less symmetrical form was derived by P!OLA [1848, 2, ~ 15] in 
connection with rods. From this, as weil as some later work, we must conclude that the 
equivalence of the theory of small deformation to that of rates of change was not as plain as 
now it seems; the difficulty, perhaps, lay in a certain vagueness in the concept of "small" 
(cf. Sect. 53). 
The explicit equation (82.3), in terms of rates, is due to BELTRAMI [1871, 1, § 4] and 
DURRANDE [1871, 4]. 
Further properties of d were derived by KLEITZ [1872, 2, § 8] [1873, 4, §§ 30-32, 38-40]. 
He analysed the ellipsoid of d-2 and the properties of the vector dkmnm, where n is a unit 
normal. His results have been presented in moregeneralform in Sect. App. 46. He constructed 
also a geometrical interpretation for the shear components of d in terms of certain curves 
associated with the stream lines. 
A formula for d according to the material description, which fol!ows at once by substituting Xk,m=xk,CJ.X~m and (17.3) into (82.2), was written out by DuHEM [1903, 3]. 
83. The principal stretchings, the invariants of stretching, and the quadric 
of stretching. Since dkm is a real symmetric tensor, it has many properties which 
may be read off from results in Sects. App. 3 7 to App. 39, Sect. App. 46 and Sect. 21. 
I ts real and orthogonal principal axes are the axes of stretching; its real proper 
numbers da are the principal stretchings, which may be distinct or multiple, 
positive, negative, or zero. Therefore the quadric of d, which is called the 
quadric of stretching 2 , may be an ellipsoid or a hyperboloid or any of their degenerate cases. If it is a hyperboloid, elements along its asymptotic cone are 
suffering no extension, and the cone divides elements whiCh are being shortened 
from elements which are being lengthened. If da >O for a = 1, 2, 3, the quadric 
is an ellipsoid and all elements are waxing; if da< 0, the quadric is again an ellipsoid, but all elements are shrinking. 
The stretchings along the principal axes are the extremal stretchings. For 
two orthogonal directions suffering extremal stretching, the shearing is zero. 
The orthogonal directions suffering extremal shearings are those bisecting the 
angles between two of the axes of stretching and normal to a third, while the 
amounts of these extremal shearings are ±(da- db)· 
The principal invariants of d are called the invariants of stretching and are 
written as Id, IId, IIId. Since Id=O in an isochoric motion, from (App.39.7) we 
obtain Ild ~ o. In any motion, the invariants Vü~ and vu--;; are measures of the 
intensity of stretching and of the intensity of shearing, respectively. 
0d, the deviator of das defined by (App. 38.12) with d =a, is often used in 
works on plasticity. In the sense of the maximal decomposition (App. 43.1), 
0d may be regarded as a measure of instantaneous change of shape without change 
of volume. By (82.9), a necessary condition for every orthogonal shearing to 
be zero is that dkm n/ntr = 0 whenever gkm n~ nz = o. Hen.ce d =IX 1, where IX is 
1 This result is due in principle to PIOLA [ 1825, 2, § 236] [ 1848, 2, ~ 15]. 
2 A very detailed study of the quadric of stretching was made by ZHUKOVSKI [1876, 5, 
Gl. I]. 
350 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 84. 
a scalar; hence d = ! Ia 1; equivalently, 0d = 0. If 0d = 0, it follows by (82.8) 
that ~ =0 if ~ =f:O; that is, every shearing is zero. We have shown, then, that 
a necessary and sufficient condition for alt shearings to vanish is that 0d = 0. Accordingly 0d is often called the distortion tensor. The principal axes and the 
principal shear components of 0d coincide with their Counterparts for d; however, 
in general 0d is not the stretching tensor of any motion 1. Since the proper numbers 
of a deviator cannot be of one sign, the quadric of 0d is always a hyperboloid or 
one of its degenerate cases 2• Further properties of 0d may be read off from results 
in Sect. App. 38. 
When d is spherical, or, equivalently, when the three principal stretchings 
are equal, the motion is a dilatation. Equivalent invariant conditions are 
(-iJa) 3 = (!IIa)l =lila and 0d=O. (83 .1) 
The most generaldilatationwill be determined in Sect. 142. 
PAILLoux3 has derived the condition 
IIIa= o ( 83.2) 
as necessary and sufficient that there exist a material surface whose spatial configuration 
is instantaneously invariant. The direction in which the stretching is zero is the normal 
to the surface. 
84. Rigid motion. A motion is rigid if all materiallengths remain unchanged 
by it. From (82.3) follows as a local and instantaneous necessary and sufficient 
condition for rigid motion Euler's criterion 4 : 
dkm = 0. 
If (84.1) holds throughout a region, its general solution is 5 
i4 = wkmpm + ck, 
(84.1) 
(84.2) 
where c and w depend only upon t, where w is skew symmetric, and where 
P~m = b!,. Therefore p is the position vector of ilJ with respect to a certain origin 
and w is the angular velocity tensor of a certain frame. Since:i- c is perpendicular both to wand top, c is the linear velocity of the origin from which p is directed, 
and with respect to the frame whose angular velocity is w the velocity of the 
material is zero. The origin is arbitrary, but w is uniquely determined by (84.2). 
That is, all the possible frames determined by (84.2) have the same angular 
velocity. We may think of these frames as rigidly attached to the material, 
and we call w the angular velocity of the motion. (Cf. the general treatment in 
Sect. 143.). If w =0, the rigid motion is a translation. 
A rigid motion is isochoric, since i\ = o. In a rigid motion, the invariants IO and B 
defined by (78.5) have the values IO = , B = 0, w being the angular speed, and hence by 
the theorem of Sect. 78 it follows that in a rigid motion which is not a translation there is 
one and only one invariant direction. The foregoing statements are geometrically trivial 
and are made here only so as to illustrate the general criteria established earlier. 
Forageneral motion, six functions dkm assigned arbitrarily cannot in general 
serve as the components of stretching. Rather, in order that there exist a field 
1 In order that 0d be the stretching tensor of a motion, by (84.3) it is necessary and sufficient that Ia gk m be the stretching tensor of a motion. At the end of Sect. 142 it is shown that 
only special forms for Ia are possible. 2 BELTRAMI [1871, 1, § 3]. 3 [1938, 10]. 4 [1761, 2, §§ 75-77] [1770, 1, § 13]. A generalization of this result in differential 
geometry was obtained by KrLLING [1892, 6, p. 167]. 5 EULER [1770, J, § 13]. 
Sect. 84. Rigid motion. 351 
x such that (82.2) holds, we have the condition of integrability\ 
(84.3) 
If (84.3) is satisfied, let two velocity fields corresponding to d be x1 and x2 ; for 
their vector difference i*-i 1 - x2 , we calculate the stretching tensor d* and 
by the linearity of (84.2) conclude that d* = 0; therefore, the vector difference 
of two velocities having the same stretching tensor is a rigid motion. In view of 
(84.2), this furnishes proof for the assertion (34.11). 
The problern of determining corresponding conditions in more general spaces of n dimensions is a difficult one, not yet fully solved. Given a tensor dkm• we are to find necessary and 
sufficient conditions that there exist a vector ck such that 
dkm = C(k,m) ( 84.4) 
where, as usual, 
- ock p ck,m= oxm- TkmcP. (84. 5) 
Fora given field ck, let dkm be defined by (84.4), and put wk».""" C[k,ml· Fora symmetric 
connection r we have the identities 
Wkm,p+ Wmp,k+ Wpk,m= 0, l 
ck,mp- ck,Pm = CqRqkmP• 
hkm,ps- hkm,sp = hkqRqmps + hqmRqkps· 
(84.6) 
Since ck,mp=dkm,p+wkm,p• by forming ck,mp-ck,Pm and using (84.6lt, 2 we find that 
Wmp,k = dkm,p- dkp,m- Rqkmp Cq· (84.7) 
Now forming Wmp,ks-Wmp,sk and using (84.6)3 , we obtain the identity 2 
dkm,ps- dkp,ms- dsm,pk + dsp,mk + l 
+ (Rqsmp,k- Rqkmp,s) Cq + Rqsmpdqk- Rqkmpdqs-
- Rqkmp Wqs + Rqsmp Wqk + Rqpks Wqm- Rqmks Wqp = 0. 
(84.8) 
For a flat space, (84.8) reduces to (84.3). In more general spaces, we are to derive from 
(84.8) and from the geometry of the space further identities, by means of which cq and wkm 
are to be eliminated. 
PALATINr3 has indicated how the calculation can be initiated in the case of a metric space. 
First, we replace sums of the type Rq . .. aq by corresponding sums Rq · · · aq, then use the 
relation Rkmps=Rpskm and the Bianchi identities (34.5) to obtain (Rqsmp,k-Rqkmp,s)cq 
= -Rmpsk,q cq. Thus (84.8) becomes 
(jkt rl!,:'s drt,qu- Rmps k,q Cq- Rmpsq d'J. + Rmpkq d~ + } 
+ RmpkqWqs- RmpsqWqk- RkspqWqm+ RksmqWqp = 0. 
(84.9) 
Raising the index k and then contracting upon k and m yields 4 
I,ps + dp/,k- 2drp,s)q- 2d(pRs)q- 2wrPRslq- Rps,q cq= o, (84.10) 
1 ZoRAWSKI [1911, 14, § 4]. Cf. (34.8). A geometrical interpretation for these conditions 
in terms of the shearing required to render compatible a given tensor d has been constructed 
by L. FINZI [1956, 7, § 7]. 
2 Rrccr [1888, 7, Eq. (20)]. 
a [ 1943, 3]. The method was sufficiently indicated by his earlier analysis of a space of 
constant curvature [1916, 4]. Cf. also ANDRUETTO [1932, 1 and 2], AGOSTINELLI [1933, 1], 
GRAIFF [1958, 3, §§ 6-9]. 
4 This identity was given in a special co-ordinate system by PALA TINI [ 1934, 3]; an 
equivalent generalform is due to GRAIFF [1958, 3, Eq. (22)]. 
352 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 84. 
where (84.6)3 has been used, where Rpq == Rhpqh• and where we have written I for ld. Raising 
the index p in (84.10) and the contracting upon p and s yields 1 
where R == R~. 
I·~p- dkP,kp- Rpq dpq = R,q cq, (84.11) 
Eqs. (84.10) aretobe regarded as a systemoft n (n + 1) non-homogeneaus linear equations 
for the t n (n + 1) unknowns cq and wk5 in terms of the tensord and its second derivatives. Substituting the result into (84.9) yields, in principle, a set of differential equations for d alone2. The 
geometrical meaning of the condition of solubility expressed in terms of a determinant Formel 
from the components Rpq and Rpq,s is not known; of course, it is not satisfied in a flat space. 
More generally, directly from (84.4) we see that the nature of the solution depends very 
strongly upon the geometry of the space considered. In spaces admitting a group of "motions ", i.e., instantaneously rigid velocity fields, the Solution of (84.4), if compatible, is 
determinate only to within such a motion. In spaces where instantaneously rigid motions 
are not possible, the system (84.4) will determine c uniquely from a given d, if compatible. 
GRAIFF3 has initiated a discussion of the problern in terms of the principal invariants of the 
tensor Rpq• according as these are linearly independent and non-constant or not. The problern must still be regarded as open. 
In a space of constant curvature, we have n (n- 1) Rqk m p = R (gkm (jb- gk pi5'!,.), where 
nRkm = Rgkm• R = const = R~. The terms involving c and w in (84.9) vanish. The resulting 
conditions, easily seen to be sufficient as weil as necessary, are 4 
(84.12) 
When n = 2, there is but one linearly independent non-vanishing component of (84.12), which 
may be written in the equivalent forms 
erxßeY~da.y,ßd + KI = 0, } 
I.rx,rx.- drxß,rx.ß + K I= 0, (84.13) 
where K is the total curvature, K = - t R. 
More generally, when n = 2 and K is arbitrary, we have Ra.ßy~ = K e,.p eyd and Ra.p = 
- K arx.ß• where a is the metric tensor. Again the terms containing w in (84.9) are annulled, 
and we have 
(84.14) 
Further differentiations are needed to eliminate c. B. FrNzr5 has shown that for a surface 
applicable upon a surface of revolution the final condition assumes the form 
( 84.15) 
For a general surface, he obtained a system of three conditions of compatibility, each being 
a differential equation of fourth order. TRUESDELL6 showed indirectly that they must be 
equivalent to a single condition of fifth order. By a method of infinitesimal variation applied 
to a complete set of differential invariants of the surface in question, GRAIFF 7 has givena 
definitive treatment of the problem. She has found two identities relating the quantities aceurring in B. FrNzr's conditions, but she has not effected the elimination explicitly. She has 
characterized the case when the least possible order of the single scalar condition is 4; in 
this case, as for a surface of revolution, the lines K = const are geodesie parallels, but K,rx rx. 
is not a function of K only. ' 
GRAIFF 8 has discussed also the various possibilities when n = 3 and n = 4. 
1 GRAIFF [1958, 3, Eq. (23)]. 2 This seems tobe a correct substitute for the method of PALATIN! [1934, 3], who notes 
that it is possible to choose co-ordinates so that at a fixed point (84.10) with p = s becomes 
a system of n linear equations for the n components cq but fails to note that the solution of 
this system is not sufficient, in general, to obtain the derivatives of cq and so to determine wkm. 
3 [1958, 3, § 10]. 4 PALATIN! [1916, 4] [1934, 3], ANDRUETTO [1932, 2], FINZI [1934, 2] including a simp!ification when n = 3. 5 [1930, 1]. 6 [1957, 17]; the reasoning is presented in Sect. 229. 
[1957, 5]. 
[1958, 3, §§ 13-14]. 
Sects. 85, 86. The spin tensor of CAUCHY. 353 
Enlightenment is cast upon these results by the analysis in Sect. 229. For another approach to the conditions of compatibility, see Sect. 234. 
85. Relative spin. Let dx be a material element, and Iet n be a unit vector 
fixed in space. Then the angle (/J(di~!,n) between these two vectors is. given to 
within a multiple of 2 n by 
and the right-hand rule. By (72.10) and (76.4) follows 
- sm . cp cp • = -v·=::-··_· gkmdxknm - cos cp d(di~!) • I 
g,.pdxndxP 
• kNm d =Xk,mn - cos cp (N)• 
(85 .1) 
(85.2) 
where N is the unit vector dxfdx. The angular rate cp is the spin of dx relative 
to the fixed direction n. In particular, for the spin relative to an orthogonal 
direction we ha ve .Tz 
• • kNm -cp(N,n) =Xk,mn • (85.3) 
The elegant formula (85.3) enables us to give a ;p12=-i J,z 
geometric interpretation for the shear components 
xm, k, k =t= m, of the velocity gradient in an orthogonal co-ordinate system. For Iet N and n point 
along the m and k co-ordinate curves respectively, 
and for the corresponding cp write tPkm; then 
• Xk m -cpk = . . ' ····-· m Vgmm Vgk;. (85 .4) tP~J=-iz,J 
Fig. 14. Relative spin. 
for orthogonal Co-ordinates, xl,2/Vk11 yg22 is the 1'ate at which a material element 
instantaneously pointing along the x2 axis is turning toward the xl axis1• 
From this result and (82.9) we se that - 12 =- cp12 - cp21 , as is obvious: 
the shearing of two orthogonal directions equals the negative sum of their spins 
relative to fixed orthogonal directions (Fig. 14). In interpreting this result, due 
attention must be paid to the convention of sign. In a right-handed orthogonal 
system, then,-~ 12 is the excess of the rate of right-handed rotation of an element 
in~tantaneously pointing along the x2 axis over that of one pointing along the xi 
aXlS. 
If we put cp =0 in (85.2), we recover {82.6). 
86. The spin tensor of CAUCHY. Set 
. -. - <>' /"' m] Wkm = X[k,m]- uX[k uX . (86.1) 
With the interpretation of xk.m as proportional to the relative spin, constructed 
in the previous section, we an! able to identify the components wkm in the orthogonal case as the halves of the differences of the relative spins of the elements in the 
co-ordinate directions. Here again due caution regarding the convention of sign 
is necessary. For a right-handed system, the quantity - w12/fgn Vg22 is one half 
the sum of the rates of right-handed rotation of elements in the x1 direction and 
the x2 direction. 
w, like d, is a pure rate, having the physical dimension [T-1]. 
1 This result is implied though not actually stated by CAUCHY [1841, 1, Th. IX]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 23 
354 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 86. 
The axial vector 
(86.2) 
is the vorticity vector; its direction is the axis of spin, and its magnitude w is the 
vorticity magnitude. Wehave 
(86.3) 
From the vectorial character of w follows, as another wording for the proposition 
demonstrated above, the first theorem of Cauchy 1 : The length of the projection of w upon any given direction is the sum of the rates of right-handed rotation 
about that direction of elements in any two directions perpendicular to it and to 
each other. 
The theorem just proved contains a statement of invariance: The component 
of vorticity is the sum of rates associated with any two perpendicular .directions 
in a plane normal to the component. This invariance may be investigated by 
means of the skew projections introduced in Sect. App. 4. Let Greek majuscule indices run from 1 tö 2, and write aWLIS for the skew projection of Xk,m onto the 
x3 direction. Then (App. 4.2) yields 
llaw~ll=' 1 ~~~1,2 -~1,111· ~detg!I>'P x 2, 2 -x2, 1 
(86.4} 
while from (App. 4.3) follows 
LI 2Wu - rl(ktgkm ~LI= V ~. Vdetg!I>'P - Vdetg!I>'P (86.5) 
The result is of interest mainly for the case when the x3 direction is normal to 
the other two co-ordinate directions. Then 
(86.6) 
That is, the physical component of the vorticity vector in a given d~rection is the 
trace of the skew projection of the velocity gradient onto the plane normal to that 
direction. Moreover, since the skew projection w~ is a plane tensor, its symmetric part may be represented by a quadric, as usual, and this quadric is a 
conic section. By (86.4) and (85.4), the normal components of w~ are pro~ 
portianal to the relative spins of elements normal to the x3 direction. Hence 
we obtain the second theorem of Cauchy 2 : The rates of right-handed rotation 
of elements normal to the x3 direction are inversely proportional to the square roots 
of the lengths of the corresponding radius vectors to the conic section 
w~ nLI ns = const. (86.7) 
Let the constant be given any nop.-zero value which renders the locus real. There 
are then three possibilities. ( 1}; the conic is an ellipse; the rates of rotation of 
the elements in the directions of its axes areminimaland maximal rates, and all 
elementsnormal to the x3 direction are rotating in the same sense. (2), the conic 
is a pair of parallel straight lines; again all elements are rotating in the same 
-sense, except that the elements in the direction of the lines are not rotating at 
all. (3), the conic isapair of conjugate hyperbolae; its asymptotes divide the plane 
normal to the x8 direction into two portions, elements in one of which are rotating in one sense, while elements in the other are rotating in the opposite sense; 
1 [1841, 1, Th: IX]. 2 [1841, J, Th. VII]. Cf. also BERTRAND [1867, 1]. 
Sect. 86. The spin tensor of CAUCHY. 355 
elements in the directions of the asymptotes are suffering no rotation whatever, 
while the rates of rotation of elements parallel to the axes are maximal and 
minimal rates (in absolute value, both are maximal). Reinterpretation of (86.6) 
now yields the third theorem of Cauchy 1 : The length of the projection of 
the vorticity vector upon a given direction equals the sum of the greatest and least 
rates of right-handed rotation of normal elements. 
Returning to (86.4), we use reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates and observe 
that by the tensor law of transformation we have 
.it, 1 = i 2,1 cos2 tp - i 1,1 cos tp sin tp + i 2, 2 sin tp cos tp - i 1, 2 sin2 tp, (86.8) 
where tp is the angle between the x1 and x1 * axes. This formula expresses the 
relative orthogonal spin of an element subtending an angle tp with the x1 axis. 
The mean of all these spins is thus 
2n 
1 f .• d - 1 ( . . ) - - 1 - x. 1 '" - - x2 1- xl 2 - - wl2 - - Wa. 2:n; • ~. T 2 ' ' 2 (86.9) 
0 
This is the fourth theorem of Cauchy 2 : The length of the projection of the 
vorticity vector upon a direction is twice the mean of the rates of right-handed rotation 
of all elements perpendicular to that direction. Cf. Sect. 36 and Sect. 56. 
From (84.2) it is immediate that the spin tensor of a rigid motion is its angular 
velocity. In making this Observation, STOKES 3 suggested that in general the 
spin tensor of a deforming medium could be regarded, at each place and time, 
as a local angular velocity. STOKEs's interpretation was extended by BELTRAMI 4• 
Imagine a vanishingly small massy element whose center of mass is at ~ and 
whose principal axes of inertia are the principal axes of stretching at ~ at time t; 
let this element suddenly be solidified into a rigid body, and at the same time 
all the surrounding material shorn away; then this rigid body will continue to 
rotate indefinitely with angular velocity w. 
An elegant reformulation of STOKEs's result, free of dynamical concepts, is 
due to GosiEWSKI 5• Since material elements along the principal axes of extension 
are instantaneously suffering no rotation with respect to one another, their 
motion as lines, no account being taken of the motion of particles along them, 
is instantaneously rigid; hence the spin is the angular velocity of the principal 
axes of extension, in the ordinary sense of rigid motions. A formal analysis 
equivalent to the above argument was also presented by GosrEWSKI, who noted 
that by (76.4) the rate of change of a unit vector n parallel to d~ is given by6 
(86.10) 
1 [1841, 1, Th. IX]. 2 [1841, 1, Ths. V, VI, VII]. 3 [1845, 4, § 2]. A similar idea had been put forward by CoRIOLIS [1835, 1, pp. 100-101] 
in connection with systems of mass-points. 4 [1871, 1, § 10]. Cf. HADAMARD [1903, 11, '\[ 63]. STOKES had considered only a spherical 
element. 5 [1890, 4, §§ 2-3]. APPELL [1921, 1, § 706] attributed the result to BoussiNESQ. 
It was asserted also by LEVY [1890, 7, § S]. A somewhat obscure treatment based on the 
equations of relative motion (Sect. 143) was given by INGRAM [1924, 5]. We do not follow 
the analysis of VALCOVICI [ 1946, 9], who, on the ground that the material lines which at a 
given instant coincide with the principal axes of extension no Ionger do so after an infinitesimal time, objects to w as a measure of rotation and proposes a substitute. 6 GosiEWSKI [1890, 4, § 8], ZoRAWSKI [1901, 17, § 2]. 
23* 
356 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 86A,87 
If n isaproper vector of d, then (d:,- d(nlb:,) nm =0, and hence (86.10) reduces to 
(86.11) 
which is an analytical statement of the result to be proved. 
To get a formula for w in the material description, we begin with the evident 
(86.12) 
From (17.3) it then follows thatl 
(86.13) 
The vorticity magnitude is related to other scalar invariants of the velocity gradient by 
identities which follow at once from (App. 38.1 5) : 
(86.14) 
where 10 is defined by (78.5h. Also 
4w,.m WmP dkp = - Id w2 + dkm w" wm. (86.15) 
86A. Appendix. History of the theory of spin. The components w,.m occur in the earliest 
analyses of the velocity field, having been introduced in special cases by D' ALEMBERT ( 1749) 
[1752, 1, §§ 45-49] and generally by EuLER (1752-1755) [1761, 2, §§ 46-47], whose 
theorems concerning spinwill be presented below. LAGRANGE (1760) [1762, 3, Chap. XLII] 
and CAUCHY (1827, 5, 2nd Part, § 1, Subsect. 4] were the first to introduce single letters 
to stand for the components. 
All this early work is purely formal and somewhat mystifying. While in 1770 EuLER 
presented all the apparatus necessary to obtain what we have called CAUCHv's first theorem 
in Sect. 86, he did not take the final step, and the components Wkm• which appear fluently 
in eighteenth-century works on hydrodynamics, remained uninterpreted symbols. 
The beginning of the theory is the proof by MAcCuLLAGH in 1839 that the components 
of the curl satisfy the vectoriallaw of transformation. Before this work was published [1848, 
1, § li, Lemma 2], however, CAUCHY, more than a decade after he had completed in all 
detail his theory of strain, constructed the theory of rotation. MAcCuLLAGH's result is 
included in CAUCHY's great paper [1841, 1, § II, Eq. 12] from which we have reproduced 
the major theorems in the foregoing section. 
The innovations of STOKES, HELMHOL TZ, and KELVIN will appear in the following sections. 
The terminology of the subject, always a stumbling block, gave rise to a controversy 
between BERTRAND and HELMHOLTZ [1867, 1] [1868, 2-4, 8-10]. The term spin is due 
to CLIFFORD [1878, 2, Bk. II, Chap. II, pp. 122-123, Bk. III, Chap. II, pp. 193-194]; 
vorticity, to LAMB [1916, 3, Preface and § 30]. 
87. Circulation. KELVIN's transformation (App.28.1) when applied to the velocity field reads 
~i,.dx" = Jw,.da", or ~da:·p=fda·w: (87.1) e e 
The mean value of the tangential component of velocity around a closed circuit, 
multiplied by the length of the circuit, equals the flux of vorticity through any surface 
entirely bounded by the circuit. It was in this connection that KELVIN's transformation was discovered (Sect. App. 28). The line integral~ d~ · p is the circulation of c. 
Let Wn be the length of the projection of w onto the normal n to a surface d 
at the point a:. Letting 9 be the area of d, we have by (87.1) 
~ x,.dxk = 9 Wn + 0 (s) (87.2) e 
1 BELTRAMI [1871, 1, § 6]. BoNVICINI [1932, 3] resolved w with respect to the principal 
axes of finite strain. 
Sect. 88. Irrotational motions. 
as c is shrunk down to the point x. Hence 
~;kdxk 
Wn = lim _e _____ . 
S--->0 S 
357 
(87.3) 
That is, i/ 5 is the area inclosed by a circuit c upon a surface <1, then the ultimate 
ratio of the circulation of c to the area 5 as c i$ shrunk down to a point P equals 
the component of vorticity in the direction normal to <1 at P. Hence the direction 
of the vorticity vector at P is perpendicular to the plane in which the circulation 
per unit area is greatest, and the vorticity magnitude is the circulation per unit 
area in that plane 1. 
The striking interpretation just presented for the vorticity vector is of a 
quality essentially different from those of the previous section, which involved 
the rotations of materiallines and hence the fact that x is the velocity of a motion. 
Interpretations in terms of the circulation, on the other hand, are but especially 
vivid statements of the properties of the curl of any vector field ( cf. footnote 1, 
p. 277). 
88. lrrotational motions. A motion for which the spin vanishes is irrotational 2 : 
Wkm=O, or W=O. (88.1) 
Motions of this kind form the subject of most of classical hydrodynamics. Motions not satisfying (88.1) are called rotational. 
In the terminology of Sect. App. 33, a motion is irrotational if and only if its 
velocity field is lamellar, and (88.1) is necessary and sufficient that xk dxk be the 
exact differential of a velocity potential V: 
xk =- V:k or p =- grad V. (88.2) 
The velocitypotential is a discovery of EuLER (1752)3. 
In simply connected regions of irrotational motion the velocity potential is 
single-valued; its application in multiply connected regions, where it is generally 
a cyclic function, was initiated by HELMHOLTZ and KELVIN 4• In the former 
case, we have ~2 ~? 
- f xk dxk = f dV = V(x 2) - V(x 1). (88.3) WJ ii!J 
If we call J xkdxk the flow along. c, then (88.3) asserts that in a simply connected e 
region of irrotational motion, the value of the velocity potential V at a point P is 
the negative of the flow along any curve connecting P with some arbitrary fixed Point 
where V is assigned the value zero. Taking x 1 and x 2 as the same point and the closed 
circuit of integration as lying within a simply connected region, we find the 
right-hand side of (88.3) to be zero and hence derive Kelvin's kinematical 
1 TRI CO MI [ 1934, 9] has constructed an interpretation of wn in terms of the angular 
velocity of a ring in the plane normal to n. 2 The term is due to KELVIN [1869, 7, §§ 59-60]; earlier authors, from 1757 onward, 
had spoken of these motions as "those in which i dx + ydy + z dz is an exact differential". 
Nowadays irrotational motions are often called potential flows. 3 [1761, 2, §§46-48, SO, 55-56] [1757, 2, §§26-27]. While D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, 
§§59, 86] based his theory of plane and rotationally symmetric fluid motions on the Contention that i k dxk is exact, he did not make direct use of the velocity potential, whose existence 
follows from this assumption. The term Geschwindigkeitspotential is due to HELMHOLTZ 
[1858, J, lntrod.j. 4 [1858, J, §§ S-6]; [1869, 7, §§ 60(s)-64]. An elaborate analytical treatment is given 
by LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 3, § 4]. 
358 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The classical Field Theories. Sect. 88. 
theorem1 : A motion is irrotational if and only if the circulation about every reducible circuit is zero. In case the region in question is multiply connected, let it 
be rendered simply connected by the imposition of suitable barriers. Then from 
two reconcileable but not necessarily reducible circuits may be formed a single 
reducible circuit (Fig. 15) by adding one connecting path, to be traversed in 
opposite senses, upon each barrier crossed by the circuits. By applying KELVIN's 
kinematical theorem to the resulting single reducible circuit and noting that 
the net flow along the twice traversed paths on the barriers is zero, we conclude 
that a motion is irrotational if and only if the circulations about any two reconcileable 
circuits are equal. More generally, if we let c,, f = 1, 2, .... , t:J, be the circulations about any lJ circuits such that none is reconcileable with any circuit formed 
by the connection of any nurober of the others by barriers, then (88.3) must be 
replaced by zz P 
- f xkdxk= V(x2)- V(a:I) + Ln,c,, (88.4) ~ ~1 
where the n1 are integers. The Cr are a set of cyclic constants of the motion. 
The cyclic constants are not uniquely defined, but any member of one possible 
Fig. t s. Circulation in a multiply connected region. 
ity potential at a point dilfer by a linear 
constants of the motion. 
set may be expressed as a 
linear combination, with integral coefficients, of the members of any other possible set. 
The coefficients n1 in the sum 
on the right-hand side of (88.4} 
depend on the path of integration in the integral on the 
left-hand side. By choosing 
:~: 1 =a:2 , we conclude that any 
two determinations of the Veloeintegral combination of the cyclic 
Since ik m is symmetric if and only if wkm =0, by applying the algebraic 
theorems ol CAUCHY and KELVIN and TAIT in Sect. App. 37 we conclude that a 
necessary and sulficient condition for a motion to be instantaneously irrotational 
at a point is that at that Point there exist three mutually orthogonal directions suitering 
no instantaneous rotation (cf. Sect. 78). This result follows also from CAUCHv's 
conics of rotations (Sect. 86) : A necessary and sulficient condition that a motion 
in. which ik m =f= 0 be instantaneously ir~·otational at a point is that the conics of 
rotations in 'three ditferent planes through the point be equilateral hyperbolae. The 
proof lies in the fact that the asymptotes of a hyperbolic conic of rotations are 
suffering no rotation, so that if these are orthogonal, the sum of the rates of 
rotation of two orthogonal directions in the plane of the conic is zero, and hence 
by the first th~orem of CAUCHY (Sect. 86) the component of vorticity normal 
to that plane is zero. 
That in an irrotational motion there are at least three mutually orthogonal 
invariant directions was established above, but a more spedfic statement holds. 
Since ik m is symmetric, its proper vectors are mutually orthogonal if its proper 
numbers are distinct. By the analysis in Sect. 78 it follows that in an irrotational 
motion there are at each point either three or an infinite number of instantaneously 
invariant directions, according as the three principal stretchings are distinct or not. 
1 [1869, 7, §§ 59(e), 59(f)]. The result follows immediately from analysis given by 
HANKEL [1861, 1, § 8] but was not stated by him. 
Sect. 88. Irrotational motions. 359 
Comparison of the above theorem with the fact that in a rigid motion which 
is not a translation there is but one invariant direction (Sect. 84) yields the 
following characterization: A motion is locally a translation if and only tf it is irrotational and rigid1• 
By (88.2) we have for the derivative of V in the direction of the velocity 
vector 
(88. 5) 
Bence the velocity potential can never increase in the direction of motion along a 
stream line, and in steady irrotational motion a particle always moves toward a 
region of lower velocity potential. A stagnation point is a stationary point for the 
velocity potential along the stream line on which it occurs. Thus a closed stream 
line lying wholly in a simply connected region of irrotational motion can never 
exist. In these circumstances it follows also from the continuity of the velocity 
field that the stream lines in a simply connected region cannot return arbitrarily 
near to themselves, as in general they may in a rotational motion 2• 
By (88.5) and (72.4) we have 
~-v·- "2> öt . -X = 0. (88.6) 
Hence the squared speed is the excess of the local over the material time derivative 
of the velocity potential, and in particular the rate of increase of the velocity 
potential as apparent to an observer moving with a particle can never exceed 
the rate apparent to a fixed observer. 
In an irrotational motion, from (88.2) and (82.2) we have 3 
Hence in particular 
(88.7) 
(88.8) 
By (77.1) we derive Euler's {heorem on irrotational motions 4 : An irrotational motion is isochoric if and only if 
172 V = 0. (88.9) 
Thus all properties of isochoric irrotational motions follow from potential theory, 
and, conversely, every result of potential theory has a kinematical interpretation 
in terms of isochoric irrotational motions. 
From (88.8) we see more generally that V is subharmonic, harmonic, or superharmonic according as Id~ 0, Id = 0, or Id ~ 0. Therefore in the interior of a region 
where ma~erial volumes are not decreasing, the velocity potential cannot suffer a 
minimum; not increasing, a maximum. 
GaslEWSKI 5 has noted a connection between irrotational motions and a special property 
of spin. If a principal axis of d is invariant, then a unit vector n along it must satisfy both 
Hence 
1 EULER [1761, 2, § 77]. 
2 Cf. HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 67]. 
(88.10) 
(88.11) 
3 Further properties of the stretching tensor of an irrotational motion have been discussed by REIFF [1887, 4]. 4 [1761, 2, § 67] [1770, 1, § 93]. The Eq. (88.9) is often erroneously associated with the 
name of LAPLACE, who was three years old when EuLER read the paper deriving it in this 
connection and obtaining all its polynomial solutions. 
f> [1890, 4, §§ 4- 5]. 
360 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 89. 
since wkm= -w".k implies wk".nkn"'=O, it follows from (88.11) that C-d(n)=O, and 
putting this result back into (88.11) yields 
(88.12) 
From this formula we may read off the theo'J'em of Gosiewski: lf a principal axis of stretching is invariant, eitheY it must coincide with the direction of the vorticity vector or the motion is 
irrotational; if two principal axes of stretching are invariant, the motion is irYotational; in an 
irrotational motion, aU three axes of stretching are invariant. The last part of the theorem is 
obvious from the last interpretation of the spin in Sect. 86. 
89. Two centrat examples: rectilinear shearing and rectilinear vortex. The 
generalnature of stretching, shearing, and spin is greatly illuminated by two special classes of motion. 
A rectilinear shearing1 is a steady motion in which the paths of the particles 
are parallel straight lines and the speed of each particle is constant in time. Thus 
in a suitable reetangular Cartesian system we have 
Y i = f(y, z), y = 0, z = 0. (89.1) 
L------------------------------X 
Fig. t6. Simple shearing, a rotational motion with 
straight stream lines. 
In fact, by (68.2) and (77.1) we see 
that a pseudo-lineal motion of the first 
kind is isochoric if and only if it is a 
rectilinear shearing. The stretching and 
spin are given by 
d= 0 0 ' 0 !!., -i '·· I 
W= 
0 
o !!,, i t .• 
0 0 ·I 
(89.2) 
Elements parallel or normal to the direction of motion are not being stretched. 
Elements parallel to the direction of motion remain so and thus never change in 
length. Elements normal to the direction of motion, however, in general are 
being rotated 2, and thus at a later instant are no Ionger normal; hence their 
exemption from stretching is only temporary. 
Entirely typical is the plane homogeneaus case, called simple shearing (Fig. 16): 
i = K y, y = 0, z = 0. (89. 3) 
Forthis special case· the quadric of stretching is the hyperbolic cylinder 
K xy =const, (89.4) 
the principal axes of stretching are the z axis and the bisectors of the x and y 
axes, the principal stretchings are ± i K, the maximum orthogonal shears are 
experienced by elements in the x and y co-ordinate directions, the axis of spin 
is the z axis, and both the vorticity and the maximum shearing have the value K. 
This example is instructive 3 in that although every particle travels in a 
straight line at uniform speed, in general the spin is not zero. Rotational motion 
1 While this class of motions was introduced and analysed by EuLER [1757, 2, §§ 48-
49], it is usually named after CouETTE or PorsEUILLE. 2 ST. VENANT [1869, 6, § 6, footnote]. 3 It was used by BERTRAND [1867, 1] as a basis for objection to HELMHOLTz's theory 
of vorticity. Cf. [1868, 1]. 
Sect. 89. Two central examples: rectilinear shearing and rectilinear vortex. 361 
of a continuum is thus different in nature from rotation of a rigid body. The 
particles need not circle about in orbits like planets. Rather, if we allow a small 
object marked with a cross to be carried along in a motion of a continuum, and 
if we suppose the object partakes of the tangential motion, so that its rate of 
turning is a measure of the circulation\ then in the rotational case the arms of 
the cross will turn, while in the irrotational case they will not. Spin is a local 
property of a motion. 
Shearing, like shear (Sect. 45) has been defined by a particular set of geometrical objects. To replace it by an invariant concept, we observe that at any 
given point in order for there to exist a co-ordinate system in which d assumes 
the form 
0 tK 0 
d= 0 0 ' (89.5) 
0 
it is necessary and sufficient that d1=-d3 , d2 =0. Butthis is not enough, 
since in (89.3) the spin is parallel to the second principal axis of stretching, 
and its magnitude satisfies w =2d1 . Therefore, in order that a motion may be 
regarded locally as a simple shearing, it is necessary and sufficient that: 
1. Id = IIId = 0; ) 2. w is parallel to the principal axis of stretch along which the 
stretching is zero; 
3. w= V-4II~ = the amount of shearing. 
(89.6) 
For some purposes it is preferable to have a definition independent of the 
spin. We shall say that a motion is a shearing if (89.6) 1 holds. An equivalent 
condition is 
(89.7) 
From (89.2) it is plain that the rectilinear shearings (89.1) are included as a special 
case. Also, any shearing may be regarded locally as a simple shearing superposed 
upon a rigid rotation. 
A rectilinear vortex 2 is a motion in which the paths of the particles are circles, 
whose planes are parallel and whose centers lie upon a straight line, while the 
speeds of the particles upon a given circle are the same at any one time. Thus 
in a suitable cylindrical polar system we have 
r=O, Ö=f(r,z,t), z=O. 
The circulation of the circle r = const, z = const is given by 
2" • • f r () · r d () = 2 n r 2 () = 2 n r 2 w, 0 
the physical components of the vorticity vector by 
w<r> =-r ae;az, w<o> = 0, w<z> = r-1 o(r2 0)jor. 
(89.8) 
(89.9) 
(89.10) 
1 The arms of the cross must not be confused with material elements, since even in an 
irrotational motion material elements are generally rotating (cf. Sects. 78, 86, 88). 
2 The idea of a vortex goes back to DESCARTES or earlier. The mathematical theory 
was initiated, rather incompletely if not inaccurately, by NEWTON [1687, 1, Bk. II, §IX], 
D. BERNOULLI [1738, 1, § 11] and D'ALEMBERT [1744, 1, Bk. III, Chap. IV]. The theory 
as given here is due to EuLER [1757. 2, §§ 30-33] [1757, 3, §§ 57-61] [1770, 1, §§ 75-87]. 
See also Sect. 98. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 99· 
If Ö =0 at r=O, (89.9) and {89.10) are related through (87.1). A rectilinear 
vortex is a pseudo-plane motion of the first kind; typical is the plane special 
case when Ö = Ö (r, t). 
Whatever be the function Ö, so long as it is not zero when r > 0, the particles 
circle about in orbits. Nevertheless, the motion need not be rotational. As 
EuLER observed, the spin vanishes if and only if 
(89.11) 
In this case, the circulations (89.9) all have the same value, 2nf(t), called the 
strength of the irrotational vortex. Whether or not the motion be irrotational, 
or indeed the value of the vorticity altogether, in this example has nothing to do with 
the paths followed by the particles. Again, it is a local matter. Fig. 17 represents the irrotational and rotational cases 
schematically by means of an 
object marked with a cross 1• 
Fig. 17. Two motions with the same stream lines. At the left, an irrotational vortex; at the right, a rotational one. 
To describe these two special motions, we have used 
the spatial description. Corresponding material descriptions are, respectively, 
x =X +F(Y,Z)t, y = Y, z=Z, 
r=R, 6=8+JF(R,Z,t)dt, z=Z. 
90. The fundamental decomposition of CAUCHY and STOKES. Since 
(89.12) 
(89.13) 
(90.1) 
and since ik ". =0 defines a motion of uniform translation, from the results of 
EuLER and 'CAUCHY presented in Sect. 82 and Sect. 86 we may read off the 
following fundamental theorem, first explicitly stated by STOKES 2 : An arbitrary instantaneous state of motion may be resolved at each point into a uniform 
translation, three in generat unequal stretchings along mutually perpendicular axes 
sutfering no shearing, and a rigid rotation of these axes. 
The most important implication of this theorem is the simplest: At any 
point, a given motion may be decomposed uniquely into a translation, an irrotational 
motion, and a rigid rotation. 
Other decompositions will be mentioned in Sect. 92 and Sect. 142. 
As noted by ZoRAWSKI 3, the several identities connecting the gradients of d and w 
follow from the fact that xk,mp=xk,pn:· The simplest of these is 
{90.2) 
Various other relations follow by simple combinations of this identity and the symmetry 
conditions dkm=dmk• Wkm=-w".k; in particular, these in turn imply Xk,pm=Xk,mp· 
1 Recall the caution expressed in footnote 1, p. 361. 2 [1845, 4, § 2]. The result is equivalent to the theorem of CAUCHY presented in Sect. 57. 
APPELL [1903, 2, §§ 1- 5] studied further properlies of ;km· On the basis of arguments we 
do not follow, HENCKY [1949, 13] replaced ik ". by ik,;. + ckxm, where c is an arbitrary 
vector, and discussed a resolution analogaus to (90.1). ' 3 [1911, 14, § 4]. Cf. the more general result( 84.7) of RICCI. 
Sect. 91. The kinematical vorticity number. 
91. Tbe kinematical vorticity number. Since there is a unique local decomposition of any motion into stretching and spin, it is natural to seek a measure 
of the rotational quality or rotationality of a given motion. This question, the 
answer to which has important applications in hydrodynamics, was first attacked 
by LEVI-CIVITAl, but the measure he suggested, Jw dt, is obviously unsatisfactory. TRUESDELL2 has introduced the kinematical vorticity number: 
(91.1) 
the ratio of the magnitude of w to the intensity of d. :WK is dimensionless; when 
:WK is large, vorticity predominates over deformation, and when :WK is small, 
the motion is nearly irrotational; :WK =0 is a necessary and sufficient condition 
that a motion which is not a translation be irrotational, while :WK = oo is a necessary and sufficient condition that a motion which is not a translation be rigid. 
Thus all motions which are not translations are assigned a numerical degree of 
rotation between 0 and oo, with the rigid rotations appearing as the most rotational of all. 
All that we have just said would apply equally well had we taken k WK, 
where k is any dimensionless constant, as a measure. To normalize such a measure, 
we might select a particular rotational non-rigid motion and assign it a measure 1. 
We prefer, however, to approach the normalization geometrically. A motion 
in which all the components dk". reduce to zero except for one shearing component, 
say dzv• may be described entirely in terms of two angular rates. One of these, 
as usua.J., is the local angular velocity, w = l w; for the other, X· select the rate 
at which elements in the x and y co-ordinate directions are tuming away from 
each other, i.e., X= dxy. Then 
2w w k}»K = k l!A:2 = k -
1 1
-. v4x2 x (91.2) 
Thus if we take k = 1, the measure k WK becomes, for this dass of motions, just 
the ratio of the two characterizing angular rates. Some arbitrariness remains 
in the choice of this particular pair of angular rates; perhaps the final justification for taking k = 1, as we shall do, is the symmetry and simplicity of the resulting formulae. 
It is easy to verify that 
(91.3) 
where (86.14) has been used. Thus we get the following alternative necessary 
and sufficient conditions that WK = 1: 
x"'x" ,n ,m =o ' 2l0 = I~. (91.4) 
It is obvious that the second of these is satisfied by (89.1); hence in a rectilinear 
shearing, WK = 1. 
1 [1940, 13]. 
I [1953,_31]. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
More generally, from (91.3) we may assert that WK:; 1 according as 
x:':. x~m ~ o; equivalently, I~~ 210. 
Sect. 92. 
(91.5) 
These are conditions on the proper r..umbers of the velocity gradient. In fact, we may express 
(91.5h as follows: lf the proper numbers of x:':. are real, then WK < 1; if the proper numbers 
are a, b ± ic, then WK:; 1 according as c2 :; a2+ b2• This result is not very illuminating, since 
the proper numbers of x:':. do not have an immediate kinematical significance. 
Further properties of WK, including other forms of the condition for the sign 
of WK- 1, will be obtained in Sect. 102. 
Now consider the deviator vkm of xk m• already mentioned in Sect. 78, and 
let a subscript 0 distinguish quantities 'calculated from it. Since w 0 =W, by 
(App. 39.6) and (91.1 )a follows 1 
(91.6) 
where eguality holds if and only if the motion is isochoric or irrotational or both. 
We can now put some of the conditions in Sect. 78 regarding invariant directions into a clearer form. Wehave 
IOo == - ~ V km vmk = ~ (wkm wkm- dokm d~m)' l = : w2 ( 1 - _W1k;) . (91. 7) 
Therefore 100< 0 if and only if WKo< 1; also, by (91.6), WK> 1 is sufficient that 
100 >0. From the remarks following (78.7) we derive a result of ERICKSEN 2 : 
I f WK > 1, or if WKo = 1 and S0 =f= 0, there is one and only one invariant direction; 
for there to be three invariant directions, it is necessary that W K 0 < 1. Rigid motions 
are included in the first alternative, irrotational motions in the second. For a 
simple shearing (Sect. 89) we have WKo = WK = 1, S0 =0, and as noted in Sect. 78 
there are infinitely many invariant directions. 
92. Sources and vortices. A decomposition which differs from that of Sect. 90 
in that it is cumulative rather than local is expressed by the existence of STOKEs's 
potentials (App.36.1) for the velocity: 
X.~=- S,k + ekmqVq,m, or p =- grad 5 + curl V. (92.1) 
The theory of this representation, like that presented in Sect. 87, is purely geometrical. We haveJ;725 = -Id, V2 v = -w, and (App.36.2) asserts that in afinite 
region, a velocity field is uniquely determined by its values on the boundary and on 
any surfaces of discontinuity, by its cyclic constants, and by the values of its expansion and vorticity at interior points. In particular, with the special choice 
of potentials (App. 36.2), the normal velocity Pn on 9"contributes to the scalar potential S, while the tangential velocity Pt contributes only to the vector potential v. It is not possible to assign Id, w, Pn, and Pt arbitrarily, however. For 
example, GREEN's transformation (App. 26.1) 2, 3 yields 
J Id d v = ~ da · p, Jwdv =~daxp, (92.2) 
" d " d 
as necessary conditions to be satisfied by the four quantities occurring m 
(App. 36.2). In Sect. 116 weshall see that (92.2) is not always sufficient. 
1 ERICKSEN [1955, 5]. 
2 [1955. 5]. 
Sect. 93. Total squared speed. I. Estimates. 
The general theory of sources and vortices is given in works on potential 
theory. We may interpret (92.1) and (App. 36.2) with c = p as asserting that any 
motion may be expressed as the sum of an isochoric irrotational motion and a 
motion induced by continuously distributed sources and vortices. 
93. Total squared speed. I. Estimates. The results of the foregoing section 
imply that any quantity associated with a motion in a region may be calculated 
from the values of the vorticity and expansion in the interior and of p upon. the 
boundary. As a specimen, we now reckon upper bounds for the total squared 
speed. 
First, a f<;>rm~la generalizing (App.31.12) is 
~ == f jhiv·~ ~da· (P2P- 2p p ·p) + 2fp · (wxp +fJid) dv, (93.1) .,. . .,. 
as follows by setting b = c = p and K = 1 in (App. :26.2), then contracting the resulting identity. Since the integrand of the volume integral contains p as well as w 
and Id, we do not yet have a result of the type desired. However, from (93.1) 
we can derive an inequality free of interior values of p, as follows. First, 
I~ da· (P2P- 2p P · p) I~ Klp~ + 2K2Pm Pnm (93.2) 
• 
where 
We note that 
Pm == Max p on o, 
=~1da·pl, 
• 
Pnm == Max Pn on 
==~dap. (93-3) 
• 
(93.4) 
where 5 is the area of o and where to derive the last inequality we have chosen 
the origin of p at the center of the smallest sphere whose interior contains "· 
D being the diameterofthat sphere. Also 
IP·(wxp)+pldi~PP(w+lldl); (93-5) 
therefore, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality implies thatl 
\ J p · (w X p + p Id) dv \
2 ~ ~ J P2 (w + I Id 1) 2 dv, ) 
~(iD)2~f(w + l'Id1)2dv. (93.6) .,. 
From (93.1), (93.2), (93.4), and (93.6) we get 
~~iD5(p~.+2PmPnm)+DV~ l/f(w+lldl) 2 dv. (93-7) .,. 
Set 
A == i D 5 (p;,. + 2Pm Pnm), B == D V J{w+I ldl) 2 dv. (93.8) .,. 
Then (93.7) yields 
~ = f p2 d V ~ t ( B2 + 2 A + B V B2 + 4 A ) . .,. 
Thus the total squared speed in a finite region may be estimated from 
1. The diameter of the region and the area of its boundary; 
2. The maximum speed on the boundary; 
3· The total (w +I Idl) 2 • 
(93 .9) 
1 Inequalities of this type were first obtained by KAMPE DE FERIET [ 1946, 6]; we fo!low 
and generalize the work of BERKER [1949. 2, § 3]. 
366 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 93. 
Several special cases are interesting. First, if w = Irt = 0, we have an isochoric 
irrotational motion, and (93-9) reduces to f p2dv-;;;,A, a result which is also an 
" immediate consequence of the fact that the maximum speed and the maximum 
of each velocity component of such a motion always occur on the boundary 
(cf. Sect. 121). Second, if 11 is a stationary boundary of the motion, A reduces 
to the value t D s p~. Third, if 11 is a stationary boundary to which the material 
adheres, (93.9) reduces to J p2dv-;;;, B2, or 
" 
f p2dv-;;;;;, D2 f (w + 1 Ir:~J)2dv. (93.10) 
" " 
If w = Irt = 0, we conclude that p = 0: In a bounded stationary domain to which 
the material adheres, there exists no isochoric irrotational motion other than a state 
of rest. Cf. the generalizations and alternative developments of this result in 
Sects. 111 and 113. 
We now deduce some stronger results for the case of a simply connected 
domain, where the explicit formulae (App. 36.2) are available. First we note 
the identity 
p2 = p . [- grad S + curl v], } 
= - div (p S) + S lrt - div (p X v) + v · w, (93.11) 
where the second step is possible because S is single-valued. By (App. 36.2) follows 
p2 = div (v x p- p S) + :: [J __I_rt/v - ~ da/} 1 + 1 " d 
+ :: . r Jw :!- _ ~ da: p] . .. d 
(93.12) 
We now integrate this identity over the volume v. If we use primes to distinguish 
quantities evaluated at a second running point while unprimed quantities are 
understood to be evaluated at the running point occurring in the integrations 
already indicated in (93 .12), we obtain 
.. p2 f dv=4n .. " d. dvdv'+rda·(vxp-pS)- · 1 JJ lrt Id + w · w' J. . . I 
1 jJ.da·pld+(daxp)·w' , (93.13) - 4n 'j' d dv . 
" d 
Under various circumstances the second and third terms on the right-hand side 
are zero. Such is the case, for example, if 11 is a fixed boundary to which the 
material adheres, or if v is an infinite region and p = o (r-2) at oo. We then 
obtain the elegant formula of HELMHOLTZ and A. FöPPL1 : 
f p2dv =-1-JJ lrtld+w·w' dvdv'. 
4n d · 
1 [1858, 1, § 4] (in the case lrt=O); [1897. 4, §§ 32-33]. 
(93.14) 
Sect. 93. Totalsquared speed. I. Estimates. 367 
We now determine abound for the right-hand side of (93.14) in the case of a 
finite region 1• From the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we get 
(J J 1ddrd dvdvJ ~(4nC) 2 J J (Idi;,) 2dvdv' = (4nC){fradvr. (93.15) 
V V V V V 
where 
(4nC)2= JJ dvd~v'. (93.16) 
"" 
Since (w. w') ~w w'2, we similarly obtain 
(! ~w~w' dvdvJ ~ (4nC)2(f w2dvr 
" " " 
(93.17) 
Thus for a finite simply connected region to whose boundary the material adheres 
we get the elegant bound 
f p2 d V ~ C f (I~ + w2) d V, (93 .18) 
" " 
tobe compared with (93.10). 
The constant C depends only upon the domain v. We now obtain an estimate 2 
for C in terms of the diameter D that was used above. Clearly 
ff dvdv' J (4n C) 2 ~ ----r1,2 = G dv, (93.19) 
where v 0 is the smallest sphere that contains v, and 
G-f~~· (93.20) 
"• 
Let R1 be the distance from the argument point of G to the center of the sphere v 0 , 
and introduce polar co-ordinates with axis along the line connecting these two 
points. Then c-J r 2
- r2+ sin0d(Jdrpdr 
R~- 2rR1 cos (J' 
l 
"• 
R2-m R+RI = n ---log~ - + 2n R, R1 R-R1 
(93.21) 
where R=!D. A further quadrature yields JGdv=i n2D4, and hence 3 
"• 
(93.22) 
Comparison with (93.10) shows that the second estimate is much sharper than 
the first. However, the first estimate holds without restriction on the connectivity of the domain: 
1 BERKER [1949, 2, §§ 4- 5]. 2 BERKER [1949, 2, §§4-5]. 
3 For the plane case, KAMPE DE FERIET [1946, 6] obtained a plane analogue of (93.18) 
with 
{2nC) 2 = J J(rag·~Y da da'. 
• • 
368 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 94. 
94. Total squared speed. II. Extremal theorems. A simple and profound 
theorem of KELVIN1 characterizes irrotational motions as minimizing the total 
squared speed. Indeed, let us define the kinetic energy 2 Sl' of a motion as 
(94.1) V 
where A is any substantially constant function not identically zero. I.e., Aj is a 
density for the motion (Sect. 76). We now compare the kinetic energy Sl'' of 
the motion .V' with the kinetic energy Sl' of an irrotational motion, ik =- V k. 
If V is single-valued, we have ' 
A j i' 2 = A j [ i2 - 2 (.i' k- ik) ~ k + (.V' -.V) 2] , l 
=Aji2- 2[(i'k-ik)AjVJ k + 
+ 2 V[Aj(i'k_ ik)] k + Aj(.V' -i-)2. 
(94.2) 
By (76.11), the third term vanishes in two cases: when both .V and .V' are isochoric, 
or when both motions are steady and have the same steady density Aj. In 
these cases, integration over a volume t> and use of (App. 26.1) 2 yields 
Sl'' = sr +! J Aj(.V'-.V)2dv- pda. (.V'-x) AjV. (94.3) V d 
The surface integral vanishes if both motions are assumed to have the same 
normal flow Aj(i'-i)n through the bounding surface il. If we assume A>O, 
the second term in (94.3) is positive unless .V' =.V. Rewording this result yields 
Kelvin's theorem oj minimum energy: Let the normalflow at each point of the 
bounding surface of a simply connected region be assigned; then amon~ all isochoric 
motions, or among all steady motions with an assigned positive steady density, the 
least possible kinetic energy is attained if and only if the motion is irrotational. 
For multiply connected regions the theorem still holds, provided fixed values 
be assigned to the fluxes through a set of barriers rendering the region simply 
connected a. 
A variational theorem which is a partial converse of KELVIN's theorem has been obtained 
by PRATELLI 4 • Consider the velocity fieldas given in terms of its Stokespotentials (92.1). 
We vary the potentials Sand v, obtaining {jp = - grad /j S + curl IJv. We assume the region 
simply connected, so that S is single-valued, and we set 
I""' f [ip2 - SB] dv (94.4) V 
and restriet the variations to those leaving the quantity B unaltered. Then by (App. 26.1) 2 
and easy vectorial identities follows 
/JI = f[p · IJp - B /j S] dv, V 
= .f[p · (- grad /j S + curl /jv) - B /j S] dv, V (94.5) = f[- div(p {jS + p x IJv) + (Id- B) IJS + w · /Jv] dv, V 
=-~da· (piJS + p x IJv) + f[(Id- B) IJS + w · /Jv] dv. d V 
1 [1849, 3]. A variational formulation is given by PRATELLI [1953. 24, §§ 1-4], who 
notes also that of all isochoric motions in a tube with assigned discharge, the irrotational 
motion has the least total squared speed. 2 The general theory of the kinetic energy is given in Sects. 166ff. 3 LAMB [1895. 2, §55], but the result is really immediate from KELVIN's theory of cyclic 
potentials. A rigorous proof, based on topological theorems, of a result slightly stronger in 
that the motions considered for comparison may have any density not greater than that of 
the irrotational motion, is given by HA YES [ 1960, 2]. 
'[1953. 24, §§6-7]. 
Sect. 95. Rate of strain from an initial configuration. 
If we restriet the variations so that t5 S = 0 and t5v = 0 on J, we get as equivalent to t5l = 0 
the condi tions 
w = 0, I,t= B. (94.6) 
That is, in order to render l an extreme when the scalar and vector potentials of the velocity are 
subjected to variations vanishing an the boundary but otherwise arbitrary, it is necessary and 
sufficient that the motion be irrotational and that its expansion be the quantity B. In the case 
when only S is varied, from (94.5) follows only the latter, not the former of (94.6). That is, 
of alt molians having the same vorticity, those such that Id = B give an extreme value to l when 
the scalar potential is subjected to variations which vanish an the boundary but are otherwise arbitrary. These results may be regarded as variational theorems for the equation of continuity (76.11). In the isochoric case, we may set B=O and reduce 2l to the totalsquared 
speed; the condition (94.6) 2 then becomes Id= 0. 
As has been remarked by SERRIN1, DIRICHLET's principle may also be regarded as a 
converse of KELVIN's theorem, as follows. Let h be given; corresponding to any single-valued 
function V', set 
~·~- t J (grad V') 2 dv + ~ V'h da. ( 94.7) V 6 
Let ~ be the value of ~· when V'= V, the potential of the unique isochoric irrotational 
motion in v such that Pn=- o Vfon = h on J. Since 172 V= 0, from (94.7) it follows by use 
of GREEN's transformation that 
~= ~'+ t Jfgrad(V- V')] 2 dv. (94.7) V 
Hence ~ > ~· unless V= V'+ const. That is, the potential of the isochoric irrotational motion 
in v such that Pn = h on J renders ~ a maximum. 
For an isochoric motion, we have i = 1, and we may take A = 1. In the notation used 
from Sect. 155 onward, this is equivalent to taking e =Ai= const., so that comparison of 
(169.7) with (94.7) yields 
e ~ =- ~ + 2 ~ = ~; (94.8) 
i.e., the maximum value of e ~ equals the minimum value of ~. namely, the kinetic energy of 
the isochoric irrotational motion which is characterized as the unique solution of each variational 
problem. 
95. Rate of strain from an initial configuration. Our purpose now is to connect the concept of finite stretch, formulated in Sect. 25, with the stretching introduced in Sect. 82. In terms of motion, if the material element given by dX 
at time t =0 is carried into d;r at time t, then its stretch at time t is the ratio 
of its present length to its original length: 
dx ;._(ix· (95.1) 
As repeatedly emphasized in Subchapter I, stretch is a function of two different 
configurations of the material. Not so with stretching, which refers only to the 
present configuration: 
d ~~logdxi . dt d:r~dX (95 .2) 
. But, since for a material element we have dX = 0, from (95 .1) follows 
• dx A. = = A. d or d = log A.. dX ' (95.3) 
Thus, in general, the stretching of a material element is its rate of stretch per unit 
stretch. If we put t = 0 in (95. 3), we get A. = 1, and hence 
(95.4) 
1 Sect. 24 of Mathematical Principles of Fluid Mechanics, This Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII/1. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 24 
370 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 95. 
Tlte stretching of an element is its rate of stretch with respect to its present configuration. 
Despite their truth, the foregoing simple remarks are of little use 1• The 
stretch of an element is calculated from its components by means of the components of the tensors C and c, and the manner in which these components change 
with time is not obvious . 
. For the tensor C, the calculation is easy, since by (26.2h and the fact that 
dX«=o we get 
From (82.3} and (20.3), on the other hand, we get 
Since dX is arbitrary, comparison of (95.5) and (95.6) yields 2 
• k • 
crxß = 2dkmX,a;X:ß = 2 Ea;ß• 
Similarly, differentiating (26.1 h yields 
0 = c d xk d xm + c (xk d xn d xm + d xk _xm d xn) km km ,n ,n , 
where we have used (76.4} 2 • Since dxk is arbitrary, we get 
or, equivalently 3, 
From (95.10} and (95.7) 2 we get 
(95.5) 
(95 .6) 
(95.7) 
(95 .8) 
(95 .9) 
(95.10) 
(95.11) 
as expected from (95.4). However, the rates e and Ein a strained configuration 
are quite different from d and from one another. This is most easily seen by 
setting d =0 in (95.10) and (95.7), yielding 
(95.12) 
Thus in an instantaneously rigid motion the components of E remain constant, 
but those of e generally change. This difference reflects an inconvenience of the 
1 Further results of this kind are noted by REINER [1948, 23, § 7] and TRUESDELL [1952. 
21, § 22]. 
2 E. and F. CossERAT [1896. 1, § 15, Eq. (2)]. Cf. also DuHEM [1904, 1, Part I, Chap. I, 
§ 1, Eq. (30)]. An equivalent but more complicated variational for'?ula had been given by 
PIOLA [1833: 3, § 6] [1848, 2, ~ 36]; in effect, he also calculated c-1• BoNVICINI [1932, 3] 
calculated Cf. A particularly interesting equivalent form was obtained by DEUKER [1941, 
1, §VI] in terms of the velocity ){ rx of space relative to the material (cf. Sect. 65): Erxß = 
-J{(,.,ß)· Comparison with (82.3) shows that the rate of strain tensor E is the negative of 
the stretching tensor for the motion of space relative to the body. This is an example of the 
principle of duality mentioned in Sect. 65. As a corollary, 4<rx ß) = 0 is necessary and sufficient 
for rigid motion. ' 
3 HENCKY [1929, 3, § 2], MURNAGHAN [1937, 7, p. 243]. BONVICINI [1935, 2] calculated 
c=r and resolved it with respect to the principal axes of c. 
Sect. 95. Rate of strain from an initial configuration. 371 
spatial description: In a rigid motion of a strained material, the quantity ds2 - dS2 , 
and hence also the scalar ek".dx"dx"', remains constant for each particle, but the 
individual components e,.". generally change because to an observer moving with 
a particle the spatial co-ordinate frame appears to rotate as places move by. 
These same results, along with their counterparts for the rotationl, may be 
obtained by differentiating materially the fundamental decomposition (37.9) 2 
By (72.10} and (76.1} we thus obtain 
X• k,m-- g kr gP cx X"' ,m -clr, q Rq P• l 
= g~ x~ ... ( C:!q Rqp + C:!q R.qp). 
(95.13} 
If we evaluate this formula at t = 0, we get 
(95.14) 
Nowc- ~ issymmetricandRisorthogonal; bydifferentiating (B) offootnote3, p. 841, 
we see(that Rk".= -R".,. when t =0. Since the decomposition of a matrix into 
symmetric and skew-symmetric parts is unique, by comparison with (90.1) we 
conclude that 
(95.15) 
Since c = n c at t = 0, for any power n, we see that (95 .15h is but another form 
of (95.11h. The content of (95.15) 2 is essentially that of (57.3h· 
From these results it is plain that there is in general no simple connection between 
vorticity and rate of change of finite rotation. For example, if we set 
(95.16} 
there is no analogue of (95.7) connecting R with Q, except at t=O. From (37.13), it is easy 
to calculate a formula for Rcx{J• but the result is a complicated expression involving the components of w, d, and R as weil as the deformation gradients. 
By (95.16) and (95.7h we have 
(95.17} 
Differentiating this equation materially, we obtain2 
.E .. p=- Q ..p+x,.,p~ .. +xk,cx;~fJ· l =- Q .. p+xk,".x~ .. x:ß+ (E .. "+ Q .. y) (Epa+ Qp 6) x;,.x6·". 
• " • • -1 d =- Q .. p+xk,mx, .. x:ß+(E .. "+ Qcxyl (Epa+ Qp 6) er, 
(95.18} 
where we have used (95.17) and (29.1) 2 • 
Since the conditions of compatibility (Sect. 34) mar be expressed in the form R),c,!."p= 0, 
it would be valuable to calculate the explicit form of R),c,!."p. This seems to be an elaborate 
matter. However, the work is simplified when R},c,!."p= O; the result gives a condition that 
an instantaneously possible strain shall remain compatible. To calculate it, we choose Coordinates suchthat at the instant t = 0 we have c,.".= !5,.".. Then weshall have c,.".= dkm+ 
1 NoLL [1955, 18, § 2d]. (95.15) 2 is to some extent foreshadowed by PIOLA [1836, 1, 
Eq. (188)], but his results are not correct in general. 
2 This result, in a convected co-ordinate system, is obtained by ZELMANOV [1948, 39, 
Eq. (5)]. 
24* 
372 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 96. 
t c km (0) + o (t). For these co-ordinates, by the same argument as given in Sect. 57 we get 
(95.19) 
To put this result in invariant form, we replace partial derivatives by covariant derivatives 
based on c. Denoting such derivatives by a double bar, we thus obtain1 
R'(c) - ~rs ~uv • h R(C) - 0 (95 20) kmpq- ukmUpqCruJJsv W en kmpq- . . 
96. Rates with respect to a varying configuration of reference. Setting aside 
the restrictions laid down in Sect. 66, as in Sect. 14 we now consider two arbitrary 
configurations XK and xk. To describe the motion of the medium, we retain 
the equations 
xk = xk(X"', t), (96.1) 
where X"' are material co-ordinates, but to this we adjoin a second motion 
XK = XK (X"', t). (96.2) 
That is, to set XK and xk into correspondence at time t, we employ the particles 
X"' as parameters. The second mapping (96.2) gives a reference configuration 2 
for the particles at time t. In the special case when (96.2) reduces to identity, 
we regain the description used hitherto in this subchapter. In the general case, the 
relation obtained by eliminating the X"' between (96.1) and (96.2) gives the 
motion of the material with respect to a varying reference configuration. The 
particles need never acturally occupy the reference configuration. 
The field X defined by 
XK=-- · axK' - ot X"'=const' (96.3) 
the velocity of the reference configuration with respect to the particles, may 
be called the infixity of the reference configuration. In the earlier parts of this 
subchapter, the infixity was zero. For the material derivative of a double field 
A (:r, X, t), we set 
(96.4) 
where ojot is executed with both the xk and the XK constant, and where the 
other derivatives indicated are covariant partial derivatives. Comparison with 
(72.2) 3 shows that when the infixity vanishes, (96.4) reduces to the material 
derivative used previously in this subchapter. 
We easily see from (96.3) and (96.4) that 
dXK=XK dX"'=XK dXM. ,cx ,M (96.5) 
[cf. (76.4)]. Hence if we assign to the reference configuration a metric tensor 
GK M, which need not be Euclidean, by analysis very like that leading to (82. 3) 
we obtain 
(ß2= 25;MdXK dXM = 2skmdxkdxm, 
where the slippage teJtsors 3 S* and s are given by 
5* 1 oGKM • KM = z _o_t_ + X(K,M)' - 5* XKXM Skm- KM ,k ,m· 
(96.6) 
(96.7) 
1 This result seems tobe included in one of ZELMANOV [1948, 39, Eq. (10)]. Cf. Sect. 150. 2 The first to use such a reference configuration was ProLA [1836, 1, § III, "i[32] [1848, 
2, "if 42], but in his work it seems to provide only a detour. 3 The analysis here generalizes that of TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 22], which was based on 
work of ECKART [1948, 10, § 3]. 
Sect. 96. Rates with respect to a varying configuration of reference. 373 
The slippage tensors are thus measures of the stretching of the reference configuration relative to the material. From (96.7) it is plain that the components of the 
slippage tensors may not be assigned arbitrarily, being subject to a condition 
of integrability dependent upon the curvature tensor of GKM· 
By differentiating (26.1} 2 we obtain from (96.6h 
2skm=Ckm+2cn(ki~m); (96.8} 
this is EcKART's1 generalization of (95.9). If we multiply (96.8) byc1km, we obtain 
(96.9) 
(96.10) 
The special case when s = 0 yields a new proof of EULER's expansion formula 
(76.9} 2 • Using this special case to eliminate dv, we finally obtain 
-1 --·- ckmskm=logdV. (96.11) 
When the slippage vanishes, this result reduces to 0 = 0. 
A material counterpart of (96.8) may be obtained by the principle of duality 
(Sect. 14). If we compare (96.6) with (82.3), we see that the dual of s is not S* 
but rather the tensor S given by 
S -d k m KM- kmX,KX,M· (96.12) 
Hence the dual of (96.8) is 2 
2dkmX~KX:"M= CKM + 2CN(KX~)· (96.13) 
This generalizes (95.7h. 
Comparison of (96.8} with (96.13) shows that c depends on the slippage, the 
actual strain, and the stretching and spin of the medium, while 0 depends on 
the slippage, the actual strain and rotation, and the rotation of the reference 
configuration relative to the material. 
For a simple example, consider the motion 
(96.14) 
representing a slab of material pressed isochorically and homogeneously between parallel 
plates X= const. Agree to measure strain not with respect to the initial configuration X, Y, Z 
but rather with respect to an intermediate state, say, half way between the initial and actual 
states. Writing A, B, C for the co-ordinates XK, set 
A ==X - t (X- x) = t (X + x) = t X (e-1 + 1) = t x ( 1 + el), 
B == Y + t (y- Y) = t (Y + y) = t Y (el 1 + 1) = ty (1 + e- 11), 
C = Z + l- (z - Z) = l- (Z + z) = l- Z (e~ 1 + 1) = l- z ( 1 + e -l 1) . 
For the element of squared arc dS2 at A, B, C we have 
4dS2 =4(dA2+dB2+dC2), } 
= (e-1 + 1)2 dX2 + (el1 + 1)2 (dY2 + dZ2). 
1 [1948, 10, § 3]. 
} (96.15} 
(96.16) 
2 The result was derived in a more lengthy way by TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 22]. 
374 
Hence 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
4dS2=- 2e-'(e-'+ 1) dX2 + el 1(el 1+ 1) (dY1+ dZ2), } 
=- 2(1 + el) dx2+ (1 + e-it) (dyz+ dz2). 
Therefore the slippage tensor 8 has the components 
- 2 (1 + el) 0 0 -2(1+~) 0 0 
1 + e-it y 
88 = 0 1+- 0 
y 
1 + e-&t z 
1 +-z 
Sects. 97, 98. 
(96.17) 
(96.18) 
A different choice of state with respect to which strain is to be measured would of course 
have led to a different slippage tensor. 
97. Variational formulae. We consider a family of deformations ~(X, t, Q), 
where Q is a parameter, and we suppose this family so adjusted that ~(X, t, 0) 
is a given motion. The first variation of the motion is defined by 
15~=-O:JJI - oQ Q=O, X=const, l=const • 
If f=f(JI', X~rz• x~rzfJ• ... , t), we define the first variation of f by 
15f = --of J 
- oQ Q=O, X=const, l=const • 
(97.1) 
(97.2) 
Thus the symbol of variation, 15, commutes with differentiations1 with respect 
to the material variables xrz and t: 
of oiJf 15------ =- axrz axrz, etc. 
Also, the metric tensor is not varied. Thus, for example, 
x,.l5x"=x,.l5x"-15(lx2). 
(97-3) 
(97.4) 
Variations, as is clear from their definition, are no more than derivatives 
with respect to a parameter. Many of the formulae already derived can be put 
into variational form by inspection. The only point of difference is that variations are always executed at a fixed time. 
d) Acceleration. 
98. The acceleration field. The acceleration z is the rate of change of velocity 
as apparent to an observer situate upon a moving particle of the medium: 
x"- Dx" + { k }xPim ) Dt pm ' 
(98.1) - !!" + "k •m - ot x,mx , 
where the former expression, which follows from (72.3), is appropriate to the 
material description, the latter, which follows from (72.4), to the spatial 2• In 
the spatial form, the first term is the local acceleration, since it represents the 
1 When the co-ordinate system is varied along with the displacement, these results no 
Ionger hold. Cf. footnote 1, p. 604. 2 Special cases of (98.1) 2 are due to D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, §§ 43-44, 73, 86], the general 
expression to EuLER [1761, 2, §§ 40-41, 56] [1757. 2, § 19]. 
Sect. 99. The acceleration field. 375 
change in the velocity field apparent to an observer fixed in the spatial co-ordinate 
system; in a steady motion, it vanishes. The second term is the convective acceleration, for it represents the acceleration which in a steady motion coinciding 
with ;i at time t is necessary so as to direct the particles along their appointed 
paths at the required speed. 
Since the basic idea of classical mechanics isthat a priori knowledge regarding 
the acceleration in certain co-ordinate systems is available, detailed study of the 
acceleration field is useful. The acceleration, like all other concepts in this chapter, is purely kinematical, and the analysis we give is not restricted to any particular type of material or co-ordinate frame. 
99. Various formulae for the acceleration. The form (98.1) 1 is not different 
from that appropriate to the kinematics of a single moving point. Therefore all 
formulae for the acceleration derived in punctual kinematics are valid as weil 
in the theory of the acceleration field of a medium. We recapitulate some of 
these. 
First, let t be the unit tangent to the path line, and let n1 and n2 be any pair 
of unit vectors normal to t and to each other, ordered so that t, n1 , n2 form a 
right-handed triad. Then if djds denotes the directional derivative along the 
path of a particle, we have 
(99.1) 
where the coefficients, which are defined by these resolutions, are the curvaturetorsion components, and the curvature " satisfies " 2="i+"i· (Cf. the more 
general theory of wryness presented in Sect. 61.) Hence 
a~ a ( . t) a; t . ( ) ds = ds x . = ds- +x "Inl + "znz ' 
dd2s;r2~ = (dd_2sx2·_ • 2) t ( dx • d~el . ) -XX + 2 fiS"l +x ds -XXzi n1 + (99.2) 
and1 
(99-3) 
Also 2 
0 d~ d~ "J x = nl. ds = n2. t X ds, 
0 d~ d~ 
"z x = n2 . d.s = - n I . t x ds- ' (99.4) 
"2 ( 2 d~e2 - d~eJ)- t. ~-x_ d2~ - _1 t 0 rl_~ dfi 
X " i + "1 ds " 2 ds - ds X ds2 - x ds X -ds · 
These formulae show how to determine x 1 , x2 , and i from X, dXfds, and d~jds, 
once the vectors n1 and n2 are selected. If we choose n1 and n2 as the principal 
normal n and the binormal b, then x2=0, x1=x, and -r = the torsion. Among 
1 EuLER [1736, 1, §§ 802-809]. The organization ofthismaterial in the text follows 
TRUESDELL [1960, 5, §§2-3]. 2 These formulae seem to be more or less weil known. (99.4) 6 generalizes a result of 
DUNCAN [1957, 3, Eq. (17)). 
376 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
the simplifications that accrue in the above results are 1 
"2 • d?c t .. X xb=XX-= XX ds ' 
Sect. 99. 
(99.5) 
These formulae show that the directions of the velocity and acceleration determine that of the binormal, and that the normal component of the acceleration 
is along the principal normal. 
The foregoing results are immediately applicable in the kinematics of a continuum, but care must be taken in identifying the derivatives along the path 
with partial derivatives of the kinematic fields. We have 
(99.6) 
where ojot and ojos are spatial derivatives of the usual kind. Hence (99.5) 4 
becomes 2 
(99.7) 
If we wish a resolution along the principal triad t, n5 , b5 of the stream lines rather 
than of the path lines, we have in place of (99.1h 
(99.8) 
andin place of (99.7) we have 3 
x = d dt äJ = ~~ ot + .i ~ os (.i t) ' l 
= [ ~~ + :5-( ~ .i2)] t + [ a;;s +i2x.]n. + 0
::• b5 , 
(99.9) 
where o.insfot is the time derivative of the length of the projection of x (x, t) 
onto the fixed direction instantaneously coinciding with n5 , etc. It is plain 
that (99.9) is too complicated to be useful except in the case of a motion with 
steady stream-lines, in which case n. = n, b5 = b, x5 =x, and (99.9) reduces 
to the form (99.7) 
Explicit formulae for x in curvilinear co-ordinates are immediate from (98.1) and the 
explicit form of the Christofiel symbols 4• For example, in a cylindrical system r, 6, z we have 
the contravariant components 
.. Dr o·2 r=----r Dt ' 
.. nö 2r ö 
6 =m+-r-, •• Di z = Dt-. (99.10) 
Since (99.10) 2 is equivalent to r2Ö = D(r2Ö)jDt, or, in physical components, rx(O) = D(rx(O))jDt, we conclude that in order for the azimuthat acceleration to vanish, it is necessary 
1 (99.5)4 is classical. The remaining Eqs. (99-5) were given by TRUESDELL [1958, 11, § 2]; 
of course all of them areimmediate consequences of the Serret-Frenet formulae. 2 Derivations restricted to the case of steady rnotion and based upon (98.1) 2 were constructed by TaucHE [1893, 7] and CoBURN [1952, 2]. 3 V. MISES [1909, 8, § 1.4]. Cf. also CAUCHY [1823, 2]. 4 GILBERT [1890, 2] expressed the cornponents of x in terrns of the radii of curvature of 
triply orthogonal surfaces. 
Sect. 99. Various formulae for the acceleration. 377 
and sutficient tkat tke projection of tke radius vector upon a plane normal to tke axis sweep out 
equal areas in equal timesl. 
Set 
(99.11) 
The importance of the scalar k, the specific kinetic energy, will appear later. 
From a weil known formula 2 for the acceleration of a single moving point we 
obtain 
..... - mn [_!!_ _!_!!___- -ok l X - g Dt oi" ox" ' (99.12) 
where DfDt is the partial derivative with X and g held constant. Moreover, if 
we introduce moving co-ordinates :E* by the transformation :E =:E (:E*, t), so 
that in the :E* system 2k is a quadratic but not Iiecessarily homogeneous form, 
then (99.12) with :E replaced by :E* gives the components of acceleration in a 
stat,onary system whose co-ordinate curves coincide at time t with those of the 
moving :E* system. 
Now we turn to forms of the acceleration which depend essentially on there 
being a field of motion, not just a single particle in motion. 
The most important is especially simple. From the D'Alembert-Euler formula 
(98.1h we get 
(99.13) 
a result due to LAGRANGE 3• The modification of (98.1) 2 may seem trivial, but 
it is not. The D' Alembert-Euler formula distinguishes the local acceleration 
from the convective, but it does not distinguish the roles of stretching and spin. 
The Lagrange formula singles out a part of the acceleration, namely 2wkmi"', 
associated with the spin alone. Of course both the formulae under discussion 
are valid in spaces of any number of dimensions. In the case of a three-dimensional 
space, however, LAGRANGE's formula has a particular advantage resting on the 
fact that the spin may be represented by the vorticity vector, and its effect on 
the acceleration appears through the cross product of vorticity and velocity, 
so that (99.13) 2 becomes 
.. - op . d 1 .2 P-ae+wxp+gra 2 p. (99.14) 
Thus while the D'Alembert-Euler formula (98.1) 2 expresses the acceleration 
in terms of two vectors and one tensor of the second order, LAGRANGE's formula 
(99.14) shows that in a space of three dimensions the acceleration is expressed 
in terms of four vectors: the local acceleration op/ot, the vorticity vector w, the 
velocity vector p, and the gradient of the specific kinetic energy. Thus every 
property of the acceleration in a space of three dimensions may be stated 
and visualized in terms of lines, tubes, and the other apparatus associated with 
vector fields 4• Most of the special properties of the vorticity of fluid motions 
1 Cf. SVANBERG [1841, 5, § 3). 
2 E.g. WHITTAKER [1904, 8, § 28]. The essential idea involved may be traced back to 
LAG RANGE. 
3 [1783,1, § 14] [1788,1, Part II, ~ 12]. Aspecialcasehad beenimplied by D'ALEMBERT 
[1761, 1, §XI], the general case by EuLER [1757. 3, § 14]. 
' It appears possible to fail to appreciate this fact. Cf. McVITTIE [1955. 17]. 
378 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 100. 
are closely connected with this characterizing property of three-dimensional space. 
Sorne of these properties will be presented in Part e of this Subchapter. For 
reasons to appear there, the vector w X p will be called the Lamb vector. 
Since 
(99.15) 
we have frorn (98.1) 2 a forrnula of BELTRAMI 1 : 
"k_ (}ik -I 'k+('k'm) X - ot dX X X ,m· (99.16) 
This forrnula has the advantage of expressing all space derivatives of velocity 
only through divergences (cf. Sect. 157), and of bringing out the effect of the 
expansion. Pursuing the latter of these ideas, we notice that for any scalar a 
we have frorn (99.16) 
aXk = ~~ (a.ik) + (aik .im),m- (a + a Id) .ik. (99.17) 
In the case when a = f B, where B =0, by the equation of continuity (76.11) 
we obtain an irnportant result of GREENHILL2: 
(99.18) 
Finally, let ~ be expressed in terrns of its Monge potentials (App.35.2): 
.i" =ll,k+FG,k, or p = grad H +F grad G. (99.19) 
We note first that 3 
wkm = F.rm G,kl• w =gradFx grad G (99.20) 
Hence . . k 1 o(F,G,H) 
p·W=XkW = vd t . o(xl x2 x3). e gkm , , 
(99.21) 
Also 
~k_ = (oH) + ~E G +F (oG) ) ot ot ,k ot ,k ot ,k' 
(
oH ac) oF ac = ae+Fae,k+aeG.k-aeF.k· 
(99.22) 
Frorn (99.20) and (99.22) follows 
oik . (oH oG) · · 8t-+2wkmxm= ae+Fat- k+FG,k-GF,k· (99.23) 
Frorn this result and (99.13) 2 we derive the forrnula of DuHEM 4 : 
"-(1·2 oH Fac) F.G c·F xk- 2 x+ae+ Tt,k+ ·"- ,k· (99.24) 
100. Measures of acceleration. Frorn (98.1) 2 and (99.14) we rnay form 
dirnensionless rneasures of the relative rnagnitudes of different portians of the 
acceleration. 
1 [1889, 1, Eq. (Sa)]. 2 While not actually stated, this formula follows at once from equations given in [1875, 
2, § 22]; the analysis there was reproduced by BASSET [1888, 1, § 21]. 
a MoRERA [1889, 6]. 4 [1901, 4, § 2]. Cf. also LAMB [1906, 4, § 16]. 
Sect. 100. Measures of acceleration. 379 
First, the dynamt:cal vorticity number1 is given by 
w lwxpl = ------· 
n-~ op 1 I • Bt- + grad 2- p2 
(100.1) 
it is measure of the relative importance of the Lamb vector with respect to the 
remainder of the acceleration. Except for motions suchthat opjot + grad t,p2 = 0, 
the condition W0 = 0 is necessary and sufficient for irrotational mo#on. In a 
steady rigid motion which is not a translation, Wu = 2. In a motion with 
zero acceleration, Wn = 1. In steady motions with uniform speed, we have 
Wn = oo, provided the Lamb vector be not zero. For small values of Wn, we 
have 
.. ofJ d 1 .2 
p R; Tt + gra -2 p (100.2) 
with an error of magnitude Wn18pj8t+grad-!P2 1. Other properties of Wn 
have been developed by TRUESDELL. 
SzEBEHELY's number 2, a measure of unsteadiness, is defined by 
l
opl iS>=-~-- - IP·gradPI · (100.3) 
It measures the relative importance of the convective and local accelerations. 
In a steady accelerationless motion, it is indeterminate. We have i9 = oo if 
and only if the motion is unsteady and the convective acceleration is zero; 
i9 = 0 if and only if the motion is steady and the convective acceleration not zero. 
For an unsteady accelerationless motion, i9 = 1. For small values of iS>, we have 
(100.4) 
with an error of magnitude iSII p · grad p I, while for large values of i9 we have 
.. ap 
or p R; aT, (100.5) 
with an error of magnitude I opjotlfiSI. Motions in which (100.5) is regarded 
as correct are often said to be slow. We note that in an unsteady slow motion 
we have WnR;O; in an isochoric slow motion, WKR;1 (cf. Sect. 91). Further 
properties of i9 ha ve been developed by SzEBEHEL Y. 
To illustrate the use of the measures WK.Wn. and i9, consider the following special 
case of the rectilinear vortex (89.8): 
; = 0, (} • = 2nr2- K ( 1 - e 
-~) 4 vt ' z = 0, (100.6) 
where v is a positive constant. The interest in this particular case lies in its being a dynamically possible motion for a viscous incompressible fluid of kinematic viscosity v. As t-+o+, 
the velocity field (100.6) approaches that of an irrotational vortex of strength K, so that 
(100.6) represents the decay of such a vortex due to the action of viscosity. Put Ä ==r2/(4vt). 
1 TRUESDE"-L [1953, 31, § 13]. 
2 SzEBEHELY [1952, 19] [1953. 30] mentions that (100.3) was suggested by analogy to 
(100.1), at that time unpublished. 
380 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
Then from {91.1), (100.1), and {100.3) we calculate 
1 
'WK=-----
1 T (e'-- 1)- 1 
[ 16:n:2v2 . ).2e2.! _ ( _ el _ 1 )2]-~ 
Wn= K2 (e"- 1)2 + 1 2). ' 
8:n:v ).2 e-.! 
~ = ---y (1 - e .!)2 
Sect. 101. 
(100.7) 
(100.8) 
(100.9) 
To interpret these results we Iet ). decrease from oo to 0, representing the effects either of 
the increase of time at a fix;ed place or the decrease of rat a fixed time. As would be expected, 
at ). = oo all three measures vanish. As ). decreases, both 'WK and ~ increase steadily, until 
at ). = 0 we have 'WK= oo and ~ = 8:n:vfK. At a fixed place, then, the motion becomes more 
and more rotational and more and more unsteady as time goes an. The measure Wn vanishes 
( 16:n:2 v2 9 )-~ at ). = oo; at ). = 0 it approaches the value ~ + 4 . 
101. Convection and diffusion of stretching and spin. We show now that the 
material rates of change of stretching and spin are expressible in terms of the 
gradient of the acceleration. While it is easy to derive the formulae by calculating 
the material derivatives of d and w, we prefer to follow CARSTOIU1 in beginning 
with expressions for finite increments along the path of a particle. 
Since 
(101.1) 
we have 
(101.2) 
Integrating along the path of a particle, we obtain the basic identity: 
(101.3) 
where ia.,ß stands for the initial value of ik,m in accord with the convention 
of Sect. 66. 
The first term on the right, ia.,ß X~k X~ m• expresses the mere transport of 
the initial velocity gradient to the present location of the particle X, while the 
remainder calculates the cumulative contributions made by the values of the 
acceleration, its gradients, the gradients of the speed, and the deformation 
gradients at each point on the path of the particle X. We say that the mechanism 
of change associated with the former is convection; with the latter, ditfusion 2. 
The equation that follows by taking the material derivative of (101.3) is 
( 101.4) 
It is easier, perhaps, to establish this result directly by differentiating (98.1) 2 • 
In the terminology of the preceding paragraph, the first and second terms on the 
right of (101.4) are the diffusive and convective rates of change, respectively. 
Thus the gradient of the acceleration field is the diffusive rate of change of the velocity 
gradient. 
By a somewhat elaborate calculation it is possible also to derive (101.3) 
as the integral of (101.4) along the path of a particle. 
1 [1954. 1, § 1]. 2 The terms were defined in this manner by TRUESDELL [1948, 36], who derived them 
from~ J AFFE [1921, 3]. 
Sect. 101. Convection and diffusion of stretching and spin. 381 
As suggested by (90.1), we now split xk,m into its symmetric and skew symmetric parts : 
(101.5) 
The skew symmetric part of (101.4) is BELTRAMI's equation for the rate of change 
of spin 1 : 
(101.6) 
or, equivalently, 
wk = wU + wm i~m- wk Id, } 
JwkiJ = wU + wmi~m· wdv = w*dv + wdv · gradp. 
(101.7) 
Hence the rate of change of vorticity magnitude is given by 2 
if2w2jj2=wtwk+dkmwkwm, or ) 
i w2 (dV)2 = (w* · w + w. d. w) (dv)2. 
(101.8) 
The general solution 3 of BELTRAMI's equation (101.6) is the skew symmetric 
part of (101.3): 
(101.9) 
equivalently, t 
Qrx.{J = f~{J + f w!px~IXX~{Jdt, (101.10) 0 
where Q is defined by Eq. (95.16), and where we write ~ß rather than wrx.ß for 
the initial value of wkm [cf. the convention (66.8)]; another equivalent form is 4 
wk = [w" + jw;dt] x~,J]. 0 
where 
W"==:e1Xf1Y(x xk) =]XIX ekmPx =]XIX w*k. * k ,y ,{J ,k p,m ,k 
The vectors w* and W* are called the spatial diffusion vector and the 
diffusion vector, respectively. 
Turning now to the symmetric part of ( 101.3), we obtain 5 
(101.11) 
(101.12) 
material 
(101.13) 
Comparison of (101.13) with (101.9) shows that the diffusion of stretching is a 
more complicated process than the diffusion of spin. The diffusion of stretching 
results not only from gradients of acceleration but also from the existing spin 
and stretching at each point on the path of the particle. 
1 [1871, 1, § 6]. For earlier special cases, see Sect. 130. 
2 APPELL [1903, 1]. Special cases were obtained by WARREN [1870, 8] and v. KARMAN 
[1937. 3]. 
3 TRUESDELL [1948, 36]. Special cases are due to APPELL [1917, 3, § 1] [1921, 1, § 814], 
VILLAT [1930, 8, pp. 10-12], BoGGIO [1935, 1], CARSTOIU [1946, 2], and TRUESDELL [1948, 
37]. For further discussion, cf. LICHTENSTEIN [1925, 10, Chap. I, § 5] [1927, 5, Chap. 1, § 2] 
[1929, 4, Chap. 10, §§ 1-2]. For earlier work along this line, see Sect. 134. A derivation 
in material co-ordinates is given by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, §§ 84-85]. 
4 TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 84]. 
6 CARSTOIU [1954, 1, § 6]; the main step was given in [1953. 3]. 
382 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 102. 
The differential equation whose general solution is (101.13) was given by APPELL!: 
d• d* .p • km= km-Z,(kZm),P• ( 101.14) 
as follows at once by taking the symmetric part of (101.4). 
Various other properlies of the acceleration gradient and its invariants have been worked 
out by APPELL and CARSTOIU 2 • The divergence of the acceleration, x\, offers particular 
interest and will be studied in the next section. ' 
102. The divergence of the acceleration3. From (101.14), (App.38.15), and 
(86.14) 1 follows 4 
IVp=x,k= k= .d+x,mx,k= d+ d-~w' (102.
1) d. ·· .. k d*k I. ·k ·.m I. II 1 z } 
= Id + I~ - 2 Ild - -! w2 = Id + I~ - 2 K. 
Since IId ~ 0, as corollaries follow x~k<O in a rigid motion which is not a translation; in an isochoric motion, 
(102.2) 
where equality holds if and only if the motion is rigid; andin an isochoric irrotational motion .x~k ~ o, 
where again equality holds if and only if the motion is rigid. 
These results may be put into a more general and illuminating 
noting that from (102.1) 2 and (91.1) we have 
(102.3) 
form by 
(102.4) 
Hence WK ~ 1 according as .X\ ~ Id. In particular, WK = 1 in an isochoric 
rotational accelerationless motion. 
Let us now write 5* and v* for the scalar and vector potentials (App. 36.1) 
of the acceleration: 
xk = - 5-;-k + ekmq v* q,m' p = - grad 5* + curl v*. 
Then 
div p = x~k = - 172 5*' 
and from (102.4) follows 
(102.5) 
(102.6) 
(102.7) 
a result which is remarkable in that it expresses WK in terms of three very 
simple scalars. From it we see that WK;:: 1 according as id;:: -172 5*. 
Finally, from (99.13) we calculate 
,Xkk = o.,Id + 172 (_1__ x2) + 2 (wk.,..im) kl 
ut , 2 ' 
= oid + 172 (_1_ .x2) + 2wk .im_ w2 ot 2 m,k ' 
(102.8) 
= ~«!_ + 172 (_1_ x2) + e wm, p _ik _ w2 ot 2 kpm ' 
= id + 172 H- x2)- .i~kmxm- w2. 
1 [1903, 1]. An equivalent result of more elaborate form was given earlier by PIOLA 
[1836, 1, Eq. (214)]. 2 [1903, 1] [1903, 2, § 6] [1917, 2]; [1946, 3] [1954, 1, Chap. II]. 3 This organization of more or Iess well known results was given by TRUESDELL [1954, 
24, § 41]. 
4 LIPSCHITZ (1875, 3], ZHUKOVSKI (1876, 7, § 28], APPELL [1903, 1]. 
Sects. 103, 104. The higher accelerations. 
If we put Id = 0 and w = 0 in ( 1 02.8)1 , by ( 102.3) we conclude that V2 .i2 ~ 0; 
by the maximum principle for subharmonic functions follows Kelvin's theorem1 : 
In a region of isochoric irrotational motion the greatest speed cannot occur at an 
interior point. A broad generalization of this result will be given in Sect. 121. 
Motions suchthat x~k = 0 have been studied by ZHUKOVSKI 2• 
103. The higher accelerations. The N-th kinestate. The N -Pt acceleration ~) 
is defined by 
(N) dN xk 
X k = dtN • (103.1} 
(103.2) 
Thus the N-th acceleration is a combination of derivatives of the velocity field 
up to the N-th order. 
The set of spatial fields 
(103.3) 
may be called the N-th kinestate. If we adjoin the double field x~"' we may 
call the resulting set the N-th referential kinestate. 
These kinestates, sometimes augmented by higher derivatives up to a specified order, are the stuff of which the most recent models in continuum mechanics 
are wrought. As yet, little is known about their kinematical significance and 
properties. The next section is devoted to the relation between the N-th derivatives of material elements. As will appear, these are not obtained by simple 
analogy to the stretching and spin tensors, which suggests the notations 
d(N)_(N) 
km= x(k,m)• 
(N)_(N) 
Wkm = X(k,m]• so that (~) = d(N) + w(N) k,m km km 
and d(0=d, d12l=d*, w(1l=w, w( 2l=w*. 
(103.4) 
104. Higher rates of change of arc length and angle3• Using a superposed (N) 
to stand for dNjdtN, we see as in Sect. 76 that 
J!!)_ (N) 
dxk = x,:O dxm (104.1) 
Hence there is a tensor A (N) such that 
(N) 
ds 2 =A1~ldxPdxq. (104.2) 
A(N) may be called the N-th Rivlin-Ericksen tensor, since RIVLIN and ERICKSEN 
showed the importance of these tensors in continuum mechanics. 
First we obtain a recurrence relation 4 for A(Nl. Since 
rs~ ~ A pq (N) d~P dxq , l -
- Ä pq (N) dxP dxq + A pq (N) ixP dxq + A pq (N) dxP d~q , 
(104.3) 
1 An equivalent statement, in another connection, was made without proof by KELVIN 
[1850, 3, p. 509] and is now a weil known theorem of potential theory. 2 [1876, 6, § 33]. 3 We do not attempt to summarize the intensive study of the differential invariants of 
motion given by ZoRAWSKI [1911, 14] [1912, 8]. 
4 DUPONT [1931, 5, §§ 2-3]. 
384 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 104. 
by (76.4) follows 
A(N+l) -,ÄCN) + 2A(N) _xm pq - pq m(p ,q)• (104.4) 
It is easily possible, however, to getan explicit formula1 for A<NJ. Wehave 
and hence 
(N) (N) (N) 
ds2 = g,.mdx"dxm = gkm dxkdxm, 
N (N) (N -K) J!f.L 
=gkmL K dx" dxm, 
K=O 
N-1 (K) (N) (N) "\' (N) (N-K) Apq = 2dpq + L; K xm,p X~. K=l 
But also, directly from (26.2) 1 we have 
(N) (N) (N) 
ds2= Ca.pdXa.dXfJ =Ca.pX~,.X~mdx"dx"' 
Comparison with (104.2) shows that 
hence 2 
(N 
A (Nl-C xa. XfJ · pq- a.{J ;p ;q• 
<NJI A<NJ =C t=O· 
(104.5) 
(104.6) 
(104.7) 
(104.8) 
(104.9) 
although the definition (104.2) makes it clear that A<NJ is independent of the 
choice of the initial state, so that (104.9) furnishes only one possible interpretation. 
NoLL3 approaches the whole problern of higher rates of change by repeated 
differentiations of the polar decomposition theorem. By (37.8) 3 and (72.9) we 
have 
(104.10) 
where the N-th stretcking and the N-th spin, n<NJ and w<Nl, are given by the 
definitions 
(N) 
T D(N)q= Xa. gqCfJ m - ;tn fJ IX' 
(N) 
w.(Nl-R 
kq = kq• (104.11) 
While the foregoing formulae arevalid for any choice of the initial configuration, 
different tensors D(NJ and w<NJ may result from different choices. The simplest 
1 RIVLIN and ERICKSEN [1955. 21, § 10]. A somewhat different method was used by 
ÜLDROYD [1950, 22, § 3]. A formula for Xa had been obtained by BoNVICINI [1932, 3]. 
2 NoLL [1958. 8, Eq. (8.9)] uses this property as the definition of A(NJ. What is essentially 
the same result had been obtained by DuPONT [1931, 5, §§ 2- 3], using power series expansions. 
3 [1958. 8, §§ 8-9]. 
Sect. 105. Vorticity and circulation. 
choice is furnished by taking t = 0, so thatl 
(N)I D(N)-CA - - 1=0• 
In particular, this yields 
n<oJ = w<oJ = 1, D<ll = d = d<1l = !A<tl, 
[cf. (95.15)], and from (144.10) we now get the simple identity 
w,<N) =<;) - n<N) _Nf(N) w<N-K) n<K)q km k,m km K~l K kq m • 
385 
(104.12) 
(104.13) 
(104.14) 
Moreover, differentiating the identity C = (C!) 2 and then using {104.12) 2 and 
{104.9) yields 
A(N) =2D<NJ +Nil(N)n(N-KJD<KJm (104.15) pq pq K~l K pm q • 
In view of (104.6), it follows that n<Nl may be calculated recursively as a polynomial in the N-th kinestate. By {104.13), the same may be said of W(Nl. While 
n<NJ and A(N) are symmetric tensors, w<Kl is not skew symmetric in general; by 
{103.4), n<N) =l= d(N), W(N) =l= w<N) in general if N > 1. In particular, 
!A~J = d~J +im,pi~, ) 
D (2) -1.A(2)- d dm- d(2) + • 'm- d dm 
pq- 2 pq pm q - pq xm,pX,q pm q 
Hj;~ = W~ ~- dpm wmq- Wpm d~ + Wpm Wmq· 
(104.16) 
The tensors introduced here are only a few of the many in terms of which a 
correct and complete description of the higher rates of change of length and angle 
may be expressed. The possible variety corresponds to that for strain mentioned 
m Sect. 32. 
Further properties of the tensors A (N) are developed in Sects. 144 and 15 0. 
Since the displacement vector u"' is given by the formal power series 
( 104.17) 
one may calculate a series for (~~.;"; substituting this series into ( 104.6) and then putting the 
result into the formal series equivalent to (104.9) yields a series 2 for Ccxß in terms of the 
derivatives of the u(N). 
e) Special developments concerning vorticity. 
e I) The vorticity field. 
105. Vorticity and circulation. Throughout this part of the subchapter, in 
the main, we employ direct vectorial notations. Our subject is the vorticity 
vector w, defined by (86.2)3 • 
1 Had we started from (37-9) instead of (37.8), we should have obtained a similar result 
except that the order of the factors w<N-K) and n<K) in (104.10h would be interchanged, 
and we should have to set 
(N) I 
n<NJ ~ c-~ t=o 
instead of ( 104.12h. The tensors so obtained are the same as those given in the text above 
for N =0 or 1 but not for !arger values of N. 2 The beginning of this elaborate calculation is given by DuPONT [1931, 5, §§ 4- 5]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 25 
386 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 106. 
KELVIN's transformation (87.1) 2 may be read as follows 1 : Let 6 be any surface 
lying upon the boundary of a closed region in which the velocity p is continuous 
and the vorticity w is piecewise continuous; then the flux of vorticity through 6 
equals the circulation araund its bounding circuit c. Thus the net rotation of the 
finite circuit c equals the sum of the strengths of all the vortices it embraces2. 
I t is important that the vorticity need not be defined on both sides of the surface 6: 
(87.1) can be applied not only to interior surfaces, but also to bounding surfaces. 
As a first application of KELVIN's transformation we shall now determine 
the nature of the vorticity on a stationary surface to which the material adheres, 
so that the boundary condition for the velocity field is (69.4). By applying 
(87.1) 2 to any closed circuit lying wholly upon the boundary we obtain 
f da· w = 0 (105.1) 6 
for the included area 6; hence, since 6 may be shrunk down to a point, it follows 
that 
da·w=O: (105.2) 
Upon a stationary surface to which the material adheres, the vorticity is zero or 
tangent to the surface 3• Thus all particles rotate, if at all, about axes tangential 
to the wall. Conversely, if at each point of a surface the vorticity vanishes or is 
tangential to the surface, then the material adheres to the surface. · 
We may express the abnormality of the velocity field in terms of the vorticity, since 
by {App. 30.1h we have 
p p p·w wp A (p) = -.- · curl--.- = -.-2 - = -.-, p p p p (105.3) 
where Wp is the length of the projection of w upon the direction of p. That is, the component 
of vorticity in the direction of the velocity equals the product of the speed by the abnormality of 
the velocity field. 
106. Vortex lines and vortex tubes. The vector lines of the vorticity field are 
called vortex lines, its vector surfaces are called vortex surfaces, and its vector 
tubes are called vortex tubes. These concepts, which were introduced by HELMHOLTZ4, have proved tobe of central importance. 
Since div w = 0, the vorticity field is solenoidal. Herein lies one reason that 
the vorticity field is often simpler than the velocity field from which it is derived. 
From the Helmholtz characterization of solenoidal fields (Sect.App.31) we derive 
Helmholtz's jirst vorticity theorem: The strength of a vortex tube is the 
l KELVIN [1869, 7, §§ 59-60], BELTRAMI [1871, J, § 12]. 
2 PASCAL [1920, 2,] [1921, 5] proposed to take ~pxda, which he called the superficial 6 
circulation of d, as a measure of rotation. He showed that a motion is irrotational if and only 
if the superficial circulations of every two reconcileable surfaces are equal; equivalently, 
if and only if the superficial circulation of every reducible surface is zero. For the case when 
d is the complete boundary of a region v of continuous motion, by {App. 26.1)3 we see that 
- ~ p X da= f w dv = the total vorticity in v. Cf. Sect. 118. The discussion of superficial circu6 " lation by various authors in C. R. 'Äcad. Sei., Paris 176 and 177 (1923) seems to consist 
mainly in mutual misunderstandings. As remarked by NoAILLON [1924, 11], the presence of 
singularities in potential flows will generally prevent the superficial circulation about a 
submerged body from vanishing. 3 This result is weil known, but we have not been able to trace its origin. It was proved 
by LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 5. § 16]. Other constraints imposed on the values of ik m 
by various types of boundary conditions were derived by BJ0RGUM [1955. 3]. ' 4 [1858, J, § 2]. KELVIN [1869, 7, §§ 6o(i), 6o(m)] used the terms "axiallines" and 
"axial sheets" for vortex lines and vortex surfaces, respectively. For vortex surfaces in 
general, see PoiNCARE [1893, 6, § 12]. 
Sect. 107. Criteria for permanence and constant strength of the vortex tubes. 387 
same at all cross-sections 1• By applying (87.1h we may at once put HELMHOLTz's 
theorem into a form derived by KELVIN: The circulations taken in the samesense 
about any two reconcileable circuits lying upon a given vortex tube are equal. In the 
foregoing proof we have assumed, as mentioned at the outset of this work, that 
the velocity field is twice continuously differentiable, andin particular that the 
vorticity field is once continuously differentiable. Stated thus, however, the 
result holds subject to rather weaker hypotheses 2, as we shall now discover by 
following the proof given by KELVIN 3. 
First, the circulation around any circuit lying wholly upon a vortex surface 
and reducible upon it is zero 4, for we may choose for the surface 1n KELVIN's 
transformation (87.1) 2 the inclosed portion of the vortex surface, upon which 
w is normal to da, so that 
0 = ~ d~. p. (106.1) c 
Alternatively, let two points lying upon the same vortex 
surface be connected by two curves c1 and c2 reconcileable upon it; then the flow along c1 equals the flow 
along c2 • Now for the validity of KELVIN's transformation, and hence also for the validity of this result, 
the vorticity w need not even be continuous: It suffices 
that the velocity field p be continuous and that the Fig. 18. Diagram for proof of KEL· VlN1S extension of HELMHOLTZ'S 
vortex surface be part of the boundary of a closed re- first theorem. 
gion in which w is piecewise continuous (Sect. App. 28). 
Thus (106.1) holds for circuits upon vortex surfaces which suffer sharp but 
isolated bends. Consider now two simple circuits c1 and c2 lying upon a vortex 
tube, reconcileable upon it but not reducible upon it (Fig. 18). The vortex 
tube itself need not be reducible. Let the two circuits be connected by a barrier .I 
traversed in opposite senses, so tha t c = c1 + .1- c2 - .I is a single closed circuit 
lying upon the surface of the vortex tube and inclosing a simply connected 
portion of it. Tothis circuit our previous result (106.1) applies: 
0 = ~ d~ . p = ~ + .r - ~ - .r' (106.2) e c 1 A c2 -1 
whence follows 
~ d~ . p = ~ d~ . p. (106.3) Ct Cg 
The result is easily extended to reconcileable circuits which are not simple. We 
have thus established Kelvin's e~tension of HELMHOLTz's first vorticity 
theorem: Let there be given a vortex tube in a motion where the velocity field is continuous and the vorticity field is piecewise continuous in a closed region, of whose 
boundary the vortex tube forms a part; then the circulations about any two circuits 
lying whoUy upon this vortex tube and reconcileable upon it are equal. 
107. Criteria for permanence and constant strength of the vortex tubes. In 
order to investigate the possibility that the vortex lines be material lines, we 
1 [1858, 1, § 2]. HELMHOLTZ erroneously concluded that vortex lines either form closed 
curves or eise end upon a boundary; see footnote 2, p. 820. Closed vortex lines, while 
uncommon, are of great interest in the theory of vortices. 2 LAMB [1895, 2, § 145]. 3 [1869, 7, § 60(1)]. An alternative proof, based on direct analysis of the discontinuity of 
·w across a surface, was given by WEINGARTEN [1901, 16]. 
~ POINCARE [1893. 6, § 12]. 
25* 
.388 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 108. 
put C =W in the HELMHOLTZ-ZORAWSKI criterion (75.6), SO obtaining 
w x [ ~ + curl (w x p)] = o. (107.1) 
But taking the curl of LAGRANGE's acceleration formula (99.14) yields 
8::f- + curl (w x p) = curl p- w*, (107.2) 
for any motion. Hence (107.1) becomes 
wxw*=O: (107.3) 
A necessary and sutficient condition that the vortex lines be materiallines is that the 
acceleration be lamellar or that its curl be parallel to the vorticity. 
By putting c =W in ZoRAWSKI's criterion (80.6) 2 we similarly obtain 
w*=O: ( 107.4) 
A necessary and sufficient condition that the strengths of all vortex tubes remain 
constant in time is that the acceleration be lamellar; this condition is also sufficient 
that the vortex tubes be material tubes 1• 
108. Circulation preserving motions. The Helmholtz theorems. The condition 
just derived, viz. w*=O, (108.1) 
is of great importance. Both D'ALEMBERT (1749) 2 and EULER (1752-1755) 3 
derived it as a consequence of the dynamical equations for barotropic motions 
of perfect 4 fluids subject to conservative extrinsic force, and we shall call it the 
D'Alembert-Euler condition. It is a statement that the acceleration field is 
lamellar. lts meaning emerges when we put \ji =ik in (79.2) 3 , obtaining 
:t <j>a:.v. v =<j>a:.v. ß; (1o8.2) 
'(j' '(j' 
alternatively, we may interpret the second theorem of Sect. 107 in the light 
of KELVIN's transformation: The D'Alembert-Euler condition is necessary and 
sufficient that the circulation of every material circuit remain constant in time 5• 
Classical hydrodynamics is characterized by this one basic statement, and 
all the main theorems of that subject are consequences of it alone 6• Motions 
in which the circulation of material circuits does not change in time we shall 
call circulation preserving motions. They will be frequent subject of remark and 
illustration in the rest of this part of the subchapter. 
By (101.12), equivalent to (108.1) is the Hankel-Appell condition7 
w. = 0. (108.3) 
1 PorNCARE [1893. 6, §§5-6, 150-151], ZoRAWSKI [1900, 11], JAUMANN [1905, 2, 
§ 386], VESSIOT [1911, 12, § 4 ]. Earlier but partially incorrect statements were given by 
MüLLER [1878, 7] and LEVY [1890, 7, § 10]. 2 [1752, 1, § 86] [1761, 1, §§ 10, 15]. 3 [1761, 2, §58] [1757. 2, § 35]. EuLER noted the connection of this condition with 
BERNOULLI's equation (see Sect. 120). 4 It was remarked by BRANDES [1806, 1, § 150, footnote] that in a theory where friction 
is taken into account it will generally follow that w* =!= O; this is borneout by the various 
theories of fluid friction proposed later. 6 The sufficiency was proved by HANKEL [1861, 1, § 8] and KELVIN [1869, 7, § 59(e)]. 
6 LEVY [1890, 7, § 7]. . 7 In connection with perfect fluids, the condition W.=o was derived by HANKEL [1861, 
1, § 6]; the condition (108.3), by APPELL [1897. 1, ~ 2]. An equivalent but more complicated 
formula in material co-ordinates had been obtained by LAGRANGE [1762, 2, §XLIV]. 
Sect. 109. The acceleration potential. 389 
This form of the condition for circulation preserving motion is appropriate to 
the material description. 
We may now reformulate the results of Sect. 107 in a fashion so closely 
connected with the hydrodynamical theorems of HELMHOLTZ (1858)1 that, although they are purely kinematical, we shall call them the second and third 
vorticity theorems oj Helmholtz: (2) In a circulation preserving motion the 
vortex lines are material lines, and (3) in a motion such that the vortex lines are 
material, in order that the strengths of all vortex tubes remain constant in time it is 
necessary and sufficient that the motion be circulation preserving. The Helmholtz 
theorems furnish a vivid and full picture of the general character of circulation 
preserving motions, whose theory may thus be said to be, in a certain sense, 
closed. Most motions that take place in mechanical theories fail to be circulation 
preserving, however, and a major objective is to clarify the manner in which 
a general motion departs from circulation preserving character, or equivalently, 
to describe the mechanism by which the vortex tubes turn away from coincident 
material tubes and change their strength-that is to say, to generalize the 
Helmholtz theorems. This research is presented in Parte IV. 
The stream-line patterns possible in circulation preserving motions are of a restricted 
type; a geometrical characterization of those possible in the steady case was given by 
ZHUKOVSKI 2 • 
109. The acceleration potential. A function V* such that 
xk = - V:t, or p =- grad V* (109.1) 
is called an acceleration potential 3• The function V* may be single-valued or manyvalued. By a theorem in Sect. App. 33 we may reformulate the D' Alembert-Euler 
condition (108.1) in the following way: A motion is circulation preserving if and 
only if it Possesses an acceleration potential. 
An evident example of a circulation preserving motion is an irrotational 
motion. By putting (88.2) into (99.14) we obtain 
p .. d[av 1 ( dV)2l = - gra 81- - 2- gra j ; (109.2) 
comparison with ( 109.1) shows that if a meaningless function of time only is 
absorbed into V, weshall have 4 
V*=~};--+ (grad V) 2 • (109.3) 
Another example is furnished by the rectilinear vortices (89.8), which are circulation 
preserving if and only if they are steady and strictly plane; i.e., fi=Ö(r). In this case 5 
V*= JrÖ2 dr. (109.4) 
1 [1858, 1, § 2]. The validity of the Helmholtz theorems was extended by KELVIN 
[1869, 7, §§ 59(d), 60(f)-60(i)]. Cf. NANSON [1874, 5]. That these theorems are essentially 
kinematical was remarked by ScHÜTZ [1895. 5]. According to LAMB [1895. 2, § 143], LARMOR 
observed that HELMHOLTz's own proofs of the second and third theorems are open to the 
same objection asthat raised by SToKEs against certain faulty proofs of the velocitypotential 
theorem; for discussion of the question at issue, see TRUESDELL [1954, 24, §§ 104-107]. 
2 [1876, 7, §§ 30-32]. Cf. the unsuccessful attempts of ToucHE [1895, 6] [1897. 8]. 
For still more special cases in which formal solutions are available, see Sects. 110, 111, 161. 
Proof of local existence and uniqueness of steady isochoric circulation preserving motion 
is approached through consideration of Eq. (108.1) by GoDAL [1958, 2, § 2]. 3 The acceleration potential is a discovery of EuLER [1757. 2, § 35] [1770, 1, § 42]. Cf. 
also ProLA [1836, 1, Eq. (219)]. Its importance was stressed by LEVY [1890, 7, § 7]. Cf. 
POINCARE [1893, 6, § 6], APPELL [1921, 1, §§ 729, 753, et passim]. 
4 EULER [1761, 2, §§ 79-80]. Cf. VESSIOT [1911, 12, § 4], CARSTOIU [1946, 3, § 3]. 6 EuLER [1757. 2, §§ 30-33] [1757. 3, §§ 57-61]. 
390 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 110. 
110. Complex-lamellar motions. A motion is said to be complex-lamellar 1 
if the velocity field p is complex-lamellar (Sect. App. 33). In this case (99.19) 
reduces to 
p=FgradG; 
equivalently 
W·p=O. 
(110.1) 
(110.2) 
Hence a rotational motion is complex-lamellar i/ and only if its vortex lines are 
orthogonal to its stream lines. Equivalently, a motion is complex-lamellar if and 
only if its stream lines possess normal surfaces. Both plane motions and rotationally symmetric motions (Sect. 68) are complex-lamellar. 
Complex-lamellar motions possess some of the distinguishing properties of 
irrotational motions 2• The function - G is somewhat analogous to the potential 
function V: The formulae 
-F aG = -i<o 
OS = ' ( oG • ) - F Tt - G = i 2 ~ 0, (110.3) 
generalize (88.5) and (88.6). Thus the conclusions regarding the stream lines of 
an irrotational motion derived from these two formulae in Sect. 88 carry over 
to a region of complex-lamellar motion where Fis of one sign. Now by the continuity of the velocity field, F can be of opposite sign at two points upon a stream 
line only if there is an intermediate point where F = 0, and by ( 110.1) this point 
is a stagnation point. Consequently in a region of complex-lamellar motion without 
stagnation points, the conclusions of Sect. 88 regarding the speed and the stream 
line pattern of an irrotational motion continue to hold, provided - G be substituted 
for V if F > 0, G for V if F < o. 
The condition of complex-lamellar motion is purely geometric, being no more 
than a statement that the stream lines possess orthogonal surfaces. Important 
properties of complex-lamellar motion may be read off from results in Sect. App. 33· 
For example, in an isochoric complex-lamellar motion, the speed is constant on 
each stream line if and only if the normal surfaces are minimal. 
There have been many studies of the geometry of stream fields. In most 
cases the work is unnecessarily complicated by superfluous physical considerations. 
Indeed, most such results are purely kinematical in nature and may be derived 
by kinematical reasoning from kinematical assumptions alone. The prime 
example is the entire classical theory of vorticity for circulation preserving 
motions, which is included in Part IV of this subchapter. This theory follows 
in its entirety from the assumption that the acceleration field is lamellar 3 
(cf. Sects. 109-110). Similarly, the classical theoryof inviscid fluids in the more 
general case when there is no acceleration potential may be characterized by 
the statement that the acceleration field is the sum of a given field and a complexlamellar field 4 • 
To illustrate the above we shall give a single example: In a motion with steady straight 
stream lines, the acceleration is complex-lamellar if and only if the motion is complex-lamellar. 
For proof, note only that by (99-9) the acceleration and velocity fields are necessarily parallel; 
1 These motions were first discussed explicitly by EARNSHAW [1837, 1, §§ 2- 5]. 2 TRUESDELL [1954. 24, § 50]. Certain geometric conditions on the stream lines according 
as they do or do not possess normal surfaces were obtained by KLEITZ [1873. 4, Chap. V]. 3 LEVY [1890, 7, § 7], CARSTOIU [1942, 2]. 4 EuLER [1757. 3, § 17]. This is the content of EuLER's dynamical equation 'ik= 
- P, kfe + fk· Conditions of integrability for the velocity corresponding to a complex-lamellar 
acceleration and subject to additional conditions relevant for gas dynamics have been obtained 
by FRIEDMANN [1916, 2] [1925, 6] and BERKER [1956, 1]. 
Sect. 111. Steady vortex lines. Steady vorticity. 391 
therefore, the one can have normal surfaces if and only if the other does. The result itself 
has been stated and derived in a more elaborate way in the hydrodynamical literature1 • 
111. Steady vortex lines. Steady vorticity. The vortex lines are steady if and 
only if 
OW -ßt X W=O. {111.1) 
For the vortex lines to be steady it is of course sufficient, but not necessary, 
that the vorticity itself be steady: 
From {111.1) follows 
ow =0 ot · 
ow ae=Cw, 
where C is a scalar quantity. Thus we have 
curl ~~- = curl (C p) - grad C X p. 
Taking the divergence of this equation yields 
0 =div (gradCx p) =- grad C · w. 
( 111.2) 
{111.3) 
{111.4) 
{111.5) 
Hence it follows that in a motion where the vortex lines are steady but the vorticity 
is not steady, the surfaces upon which owjot bears a constant ratio to w are vortex 
surfaces. 
Following the analysis of MASOTTI 2, we may characterize flows with steady 
vorticity by noting that ( 111.2) is equivalent to 
op curl 7Jt = 0. {111.6) 
Hence (111.2) is satisfied if and only if there exists a scalar U(;r, t) such that 3 
(!. 
~- = grad U; {111.7) 
that is, the local acceleration is lamellar, and thus by integration we obtain 
p (;r, t) = grad [J U(;r, t) dt] + u (;r): ( 111.8) 
A necessary and sufficient condition that a motion have steady vorticity is that the 
velocity be the sum of a lamellar field and a steady field. An irrotational motion 
furnishes a special case, with U =- oVjot, u =0. Henceforward in this part 
of the subchapter the symbol U will be employed only in the sense indicated 
by (111.7). 
For any motion with steady vorticity we may put ( 111.7) into LAGRANGE's 
acceleration formula (99.14), obtaining 
p=wxp+grad(l;62 + U), {111.9) 
a result whose significance will appear in Part e IV. 
1 ßYUSHGENS [1948, 3, § 4.3], (OBURN [1952, 2]. 2 [1927, 7, § 2]. 3 By (79-3). the condition (111.7) with single-valued U is necessary and sufficient that 
the circulation about every spatial circuit remain constant in time. 
392 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 112. 
More generally, from (107.2), which holds in any motion, and from the condition (107.4) we conclude that a motion with steady vorticity is circulation preserving if and only if the Lamb vector is lamellar: 
curl(wxp) =0. {111.10) 
If we substitute (110.1) into {111.10), a rather complicated condition results. For the 
case when the normal surfaces areminimal {cf. Sect. App. 33), PRIM1 has used this condition 
to derive the following theorem: In a steady isochoric circulation preserving complex-lamellar 
motion such that the speed is constant along each stream line, it is possible to parametrize the 
normal surfaces G = const in such a way that rnc = 0. By {88.9) it follows that the totality 
of stream-line patterns for this dass of motions is exhausted by the special case when 
"circulation preserving" is replaced by "irrotational ". The irrotational case has been 
characterized in a celebrated and difficult analysis by HAMEL2• 
112. Screw motions. In a rotational motion with vanishing Lamb vector 
wxp=O, w=!=O, (112.1) 
the velocity field is a screw field (Sect. App. 34); such a motion will be called a 
screw motion. 
Screw motions and complex-lamellar motions are mutually exclusive types, 
and each shares some of the properties of irrotational motions, which, by the 
definitions employed in the present work, are included as special cases of the 
latter but not of the former. In an irrotational motion there are no vortex lines, 
the stream lines are normal to the equipotential surfaces, and the convective 
acceleration may be determined from the speed alone. In a complex-lamellar 
motion the vortex lines are normal to the stream lines, the stream lines are 
endowed with normal surfaces, but the acceleration possesses no particularly 
simple quality. On the other hand, in a screw motion, just as in an irrotational 
motion, (99.14) reduces to 
(112.2) 
the vortex lines coincide with the stream lines, and a congruence of surfaces 
normal to the stream lines does not exist. 
From (112.2) in the steady case follows the first Gromeka-Beltrami 
theorem3 : Any steady screw motion is circulation preserving, its acceleration 
potential being 
V*=- tP2 + const. (112.3) 
Fro a steady screw motion with steady density (Sect. 77), we have div(jBp) 
= 0, where B = const along each stream line, so we may put m =j B in 
(App. 34.5); the first corollary following (App. 34.6) then yields the second 
Gromeka-Beltrami theorem: In a steady screw motion 
on each stream line. 
-~- = const 
1P ( 112.4) 
Finally, BELTRAMI showed in effect that a circulation preserving screw motion 
is necessarily steady. We give the elegant proof of BJ0RGUM 4• First, it follows 
immediately from ( 1 07.2) and ( 108.1) that in a circulation preserving screw motion, 
the vorticity is steady. Since by (App. 34.4) 2 the abnormality A of a screw field is --------~- --- -~-
1 [1948, 22, §§ 4- 5] [1952, 16, Chap. V, § B]. 2 [1937, 2]. Cf. also HoWARD [1953, 13]. 
3 References for this sequence of theorems are given in Sect. App. 34. 4 [1951, 2, Sect. 2.5]. Cf. also I3ALLABH [1940, 1, § 6] [1948, 1, § 4]. 
Sect. 113. Circumstances when an irrotational motion is impossible. 393 
determined by the vorticity field alone, Ais steady if w is steady. But p =wfA, 
and hence a screw motion is steady if and only if its vorticity is steady. Several 
of the foregoing statements may be combined in a single theorem oj Beltrami: 
A screw motion is circulation preserving if and only if it satisfies the following two 
equivalent conditions: It is steady, or its vorticity is steady. 
Withc =p, the condition (App. 31.14) is satisfied by a screw motion. The theorem 
following (App. 31.12) thus implies that an isochoric screw motion adhering to fixed 
boundaries and at rest at oo, in the sense (App. 31.13), cannot exist1 ; the only 
irrotational motion possible under these conditions is a state of rest. 
Certain restrictions on the stream-line pattern of a screw motion have been noticed by 
MORERA and TRUESDELL2. 
113. Circumstances when an irrotational motion is impossible. Following the 
line of thought suggested by the last theorem, we can determine various cases 
when an irrotational motion is incompatible with the boundary conditions of 
Sect. 69. 
We begin with the theorem oj Kelvin and Helmholtz 3: In a simply 
connected region, an irrotational motion such that i V ~: = o (p-2) in any infinite 
portion, while all finite boundaries are stationary, if either steady or isochoric is a 
state of rest. 
Proof. Since the domain is simply connected, any irrotational motion within 
it must be possessed of a single-valued velocity potential V. For an isochoric 
motion we may put IV= V, c =p in (App.31.5), thus obtaining 
J p2 dv = - p da · p V= 0, (113.1) " . where the vanishing of the surface integral follows from (69.2) and the assumed 
order condition at oo. From (113.1) we conclude that p =0. Fora steady motion 
we may put IV= V, c =ip in (App.31.5), thus obtaining 
fip2 dv =- pda ·Pi V= 0. (113.2) 
" . Since i >0, the theorem again follows, Q.E.D. 
We note the following corollaries. First, for a motion in the interior of a finite 
region the condition at oo becomes superfluous, and the theorem holds unconditionally: There is no isochoric or steady irrotational motion, other than a state of 
rest, within a finite simply connected region with stationary boundary. Second, 
if the region of motion is suchthat p-+0 uniformly at oo, then for the isochoric 
case a theorem on isolated singularities of harmonic functions implies that the 
three components ·fik in the common frame are single-valued harmonic functions 
analytic at oo. This fact together with the condition that p da · p = 0 for a 
• sufficiently large sphere yields ·fik=O(p-2), whence follows V=O(p-1). Thus 
V ~: = 0 (p-a) = o (p-2), so at oo the order condition is satisfied. That is: In an 
isochoric irrotational motion in an infinite region such that all bounding surfaces 
are stationary, if the velocity field vanishes uniformly at infinity and if no material 
is supplied at infinity, then the motion is a state of rest. 
I TRUESDELL [1951, 29]. 
2 [1889. 6]; [1954. 24, §52]. 
3 [1849. 3]; [1858, 1, § 1]. 
394 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 113. 
That the foregoing result cannot be extended to multiply connected regions 
may be seen from the counter example of the irrotational vortex (89.11), which 
is irrotational in the doubly connected domain O<r{;::=;.r~r , lzl ~z • The reason 
the above proof fails to hold for multiply connected regions is that then V is 
many-valued, so that the substitution \1! =V in (App. 31.5) is no Ionger permissible. 
That when the motion is not isochoric the restriction to steady motion is essential 
may be seen from the counter example of the oscillating motion 
! = l [ 1 + q sin k t sin x] , _o < : < 1 , } 
X = f l q k COS k t COS X, y = Z = 0, (113-3) 
which is irrotational in the finite simply connected domain I x I~ ! n, I y I~ a, I z I~ b, upon whose boundaries it satisfies (69.2) 
In the case of boundaries where the condition of adherence (69.4) is to hold, 
irrotational motion is often impossible. A theorem to this effect, for the isochoric case, is included in that proved at the end of Sect. 112. Indeed, it was 
asserted by DuHEM1 that the adherence condition and irrotational motion are 
usually incompatible, but this proof is not convincing, and his statement cannot 
be true in general, since the oscillating motion given in spherical co-ordinates 
r, (), <j> by 
j = ~- [ 1 + q sin k t sin r] , . 0 < ~ < 1 , ) . 
r = ]l'f.~cosktcosr, ()=O, <j>=O, r 
(113.4) 
is a motion which is continuous and irrotational within the spherical shell 
ln~r~in, to whose stationary boundaries the material adheres. However, 
for the isochoric case there are theorems asserting the incompatibility of irrotational motion with adherence to any finite surface, however small. We begin 
with the theore1n of Kirchhoff2: The only isochoric irrotational motion in which 
the material adheres to a finite stationary surface, however small, is a state of rest. 
Proof: By (69.4), the velocitypotential Visa harmonic function all of whose 
first derivatives with respect to the space variables vanish upon the finite surface. Upon that finite surface, consequently, the function itself is constant and 
its normal derivative vanishes. The only such harmonic function is a constant. 
Q.E.D. 
As an immediate corollary it follows that the only isochoric irrotational motion 
in which the material adheres to a finite surface in rigid translation is itself a 
rigid translation. The results just stated and proved refer to the state of motion 
at any one instant. 
Following the analysis of SuPIN0 3, let us now consider the case when the 
material adheres to surfaces suffering rigid rotation at angular velocity w(t). 
If we refer an irrotational motion whose velocity potential is V to a co-ordinate 
frame which is at rest with respect to these surfaces, and whose origin coincides 
with the origin of a system with respect to which the motion is irrotational, 
for the velocity with respect to the moving frame we obtain 
p' =-wxp- grad V, (113.5) 
1 [ 1901, 7, 5' partie, Chap. II, § 1]. 2 While the proof of KIReRHOFF [1876, 2, Vor!. 16, § 6] is not rigorous, the result is true, 
being in fact one way of phrasing a now weil known theorem of potential theory. 3 [ 1949. 29]. 
Sect. 113. Circumstances when an irrotational motion is impossible. 
or equivalently 
x' = 2w.y- P,%, Y' = 2wxz- P,y. z' = 2wyx- P, •• 
where P, given by 
p = V + X Wy z + y w. X + z Q)% y, 
395 
(113.6) 
(113.7) 
is also harmonic. At any given instant we may orient the axes in such a way 
that Wz=wy=O, w.=w, so that (113.6) reduces to 
x' = 2w y- P,", :V= - P,y, z'=- P, •. (113.8) 
Since the adherence condition (69.4) now assumes the form p' = 0, the harmonic 
function P must satisfy the boundary conditions 
P,z= 2w y, P,y= 0, P,,= 0. (113.9) 
We suppose w =f= 0 so as to exclude the case treated in the previous paragraph. 
Consider first a motion within finite rigid boundary surfaces, on each point 
of which (113.9) applies. Then j/ and .i:' are harmonic functions vanishing upon 
a closed bounding surface, and hence vanishing identically. Thus P,y=O, P,,= 0; 
since J72P=O it follows that P=ax+b. Comparing this result with (113.9)1 
yields 2w y = a, but since w =f= 0 this condition can be satisfied only upon a single 
plane y = const, a type of boundary not included in the hypothesis. Hence no 
such motion exists. Second, consider a motion exterior to finite rigid surfaces, 
on each point of which (113.9) applies. Let us call regular a velocity field which, 
relative to the surfaces in question, approaches a definite Iimit at oo and possesses 
a gradient which is 0 (p-2). Then by the uniqueness of solution to th,e exterior 
Dirichlet problern the functions Y' and z' must vanish identically, and again 
there is no such regular motion. These results constitute the following first 
theorem of Supino: No continuous isochoric irrotational motion of a material 
adhering to boundary surfaces and completely filling a finite domain whose boundaries 
form a rigid system exists. There exists no such motion with a regular velocity field 
filling an infinite domain exterior to a rigid system of surfaces to which the material 
adheres. 
In the statement of the above theorem the term "rigid system" denotes a 
set of rigid surfaces rigidly attached to one another, so that all are endowed 
with the same angular velocity. Various irrotational motions of materials adhering to rigid bounding surfaces can indeed exist if these are in relative motion, 
or if the motion relative to them is not regular at oo. A simple example is the 
plane irrotational vortex already cited, for the stream lines are the rigid concentric 
circles r = r 0 , z = z0 , rota ting a t angular speeds w = K r-2• Another exam ple 
is furnished by the rectilinear motion x' = 2w y, y' = 0, z' = 0, or, equivalently, 
.X =wy, y =wx, where the material adheres to the plane y =0, which is rotating 
at angular speed w about the z-axis. 
In general, however, as SUPINO points out, the conditions (113.9) 2 and (113.9) 3 
are themselves sufficient to determine P, and hence are not likely tobe compatible 
with (113.9)1 except in degenerate cases. Another way of putting this same 
thing is to say that if there exists a harmonic function P satisfying (113.9) on 
any finite surface, however small, then by the theorem of KIRCHHOFF mentioned 
above it is unique in all space to within an additive constant. Expressed in 
kinematical terms, this result becomes the following second theorem of Supino: 
Suppose there exist an isochoric irrotational motion of a material adhering to a 
certain rigid boundary surface rotating at a certain angular velocity Then there 
is no other such motion adhering to any finite portion of that surface, however 
396 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 114, 115. 
small, rotating at the same angular velocity. Applying this theorem to the second 
example noted in the preceding paragraph shows that the only such motion of 
a material adhering to a finite plane area rotating about an axis in its plane is 
the motion induced by the rigid rotation of the entire plane. Similarly, from 
the first example we condude that the only such motion of a material adhering 
to a finite portion of a circular cylinder rotating about its axis is the irrotational 
vortex motion induced by the rotation of the entire cylinder1 . 
114. Superposahle motions 2• Two velocity fields p1 and p2 belonging to a 
certain dass are said to be superposable if their vector sum, p 1 + p2 , belongs to 
the same dass. If 2p belongs to the samedass as p, then p is said to be selfsuperposable. 
Consider first the dass of circulation preserving motions. Since from (107.2) 
we ha ve for all motion 3 
curl (p1 + p 2) = curlp1 + curlp~ + curl (w1 Xp2 + w 2 Xih) 
by ( 108.1) follows the condition for superposability: 
curl(w1 XP2 +w2 XPJ) =0. 
(114.1) 
(114.2) 
It is trivial to remark that any two irrotational motions or any two screw motions 
having the same abnormality are superposable, and hence that any irrotational 
or steady screw motion is self-superposable. In the irrotational case, from (88.2) 
it is immediate that the velocity potential for the combined motion is the sum of 
the velocity Potentials of the two original motions 4• Also from {111.10) it follows 
that any circulation preserving motion with steady vorticity is self-superposable. 
It is not true in general however that an unsteady circulation preserving motion 
is self-superposable, that any two screw motions are superposable, or that an 
irrotational motion is superposable upon a circulation preserving motion. 
Second, consider the dass of motions whose acceleration is complex-lamellar. 
From (114.1) and (App. 33-5)1 follows the necessary and sufficient condition 
P1 · curl Pz + Pz · curlp1 + (PJ + Pz) · curl(w1 Xpz + WzXPJ) = 0. (114.3) 
For the self-superposable case this becomes 
p·curl(wxp) =0, 
since p · curl p = 0; equivalently, .. ow P·-ae=o. 
( 114.4) 
(114.5) 
Thus a motion with complex-lamellar acceleration is self-superposable if and only 
of the local rate of change of vorticity is normal to the acceleration. 
e II) Vorticity averages. 
115. lntensity balance. The decomposition theorem of CAUCHY and STOKES 
(Sect. 90) resolves the local and instantaneous motion into stretching and spin. 
We now consider spatial averages of scalar measures of these portions. With 
1 SuPINO shows further that these two motions are the only possible plane isochoric 
irrotational motions in which the material adheres to any finite rigid surface. 2 The following analysis, suggested by earlier work of BALLABH [ 1940, 1 and 2], STRANG 
[1948, 28], and ERGUN [1949, 6], was given by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 95]. 3 The dot over the bar indicates, of course, the material derivative based upon the 
total velocity, P 1 + P2 • 
4 STOKES [1844, 4, § 5]. 
Sect. 116. Linear balance. 
IO defined by (78. 5) 1 , it is easy to show that 
div(p · gradjJ- Idp) =- 2IO =- 2II.,- tw2, 
where the second step follows by (86.14) 1 • Hence 
J IO d v = - } ~ da · ( p · grad p - Id p) , l V ~ 
1 ,+.. d (·· 8p I . ) z'j" a·p-81- dP· 
• 
397 
(115.1) 
(115.2) 
Hence follows the theorem of intensity balance1: I f all finite boundaries are 
stationary, and if upon them the material adheres without slipping, while in any 
portion of the material extending to oo the condition 
(115.3) 
is satisfied, then the average value of IO over the entire motion is zero; equivalently, 
f (4IIa + w2) dv = 0. (115.4) V 
W e note several corollaries. ( 1) F or a motion of the type described in the theorem 
to be rotational it is necessary that there exist within it a region where Ha< 0. 
(2) In an irrotational motion satisfying the hypotheses of the theorem, the average 
value of IIa is zero. (3) In an isochoric motion of the type described in the theorem 
the average value of the squared vorticity must equal twice the average value of the 
squared intensity of deformation: 
fw2 dv=2fiiadv. (115.5) V V 
From the third corollary, which is a consequence of (86.14) 2 and (77.1), follows 
another proof of the theorem on the impossibility of irrotational adhering motions 
in a finite domain (Sect. 113). 
116. Linear balance. The previous section demonstrated that in a broad 
dass of motions an average balance between the second deformation invariant 
and the squared magnitude of the vorticity is maintained. Weshall now establish 
two simpler but kinematically less informative relations of balance connecting 
the vorticity vector w and the expansion Ia. 
Let h be any single-valued harmonic gradient: h = grad Q, 172 Q = 0. In 
(App. 26.2), put K = 0, b = p, c = h. Then there results 
p[da · ('p h + hp) -da p · h] = f[h Ia- hx·w] dv. (116.1) 6 V 
By formulating conditions sufficient for the vanishing of the surface integral 
we obtain the first linear balance theorem 2 : Let h be a single-valued harmonic gradient, and let Ia be the expansion and w the vorticity of a motion in a 
region v such that 
1. Each finite boundary is stationary, and upon it the material adheres without 
slipping; 
1 TRUESDELL [ 1950, 34]. A geometrical construction for the space average of IO had 
previously been invented by BrLIMOVITCH [1948, 2] and has been discussed further [1950, 
34] [ 1953, 1]. From these results follows a characterization of those motions in which IO = 0; 
this class had been studied previously by HAMEL [ 1936, 4, § § 2-3]. 2 TRUESDELL [1951, 30]. The special case I d = 0 forafinite domain was given by BERKER 
[1949. 1, Th. IV]. 
398 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
2. In any Portion of v which extends to oo, 
(p h + h P)n = 0 (p-2), p · h = 0 (p-2); 
then 
j[ h ld - h X W] d V = 0. 
" 
A simple condition sufficient for (116.2) is hp=o(p-2). 
Sect. 116. 
(116.2) 
(116.3) 
Let 1 be a field whose curl is a harmonic gradient: curll = gradF, V2 F = 0, 
the harmonic function F being single-valued. Then we have 
div(Fp) =Fld + p · curll, } 
=F Id + div(lxp)+l·w. (116.4) 
Hence by GREEN's transformation follows 
pda · [Fp + pxj] = f[Fld +I· w]dv. (116.5) 
6 " 
By formulating conditions sufficient for the vanishing of the surface integral we 
obtain the second linear balance theorem 1 : Let F be a single-valued harmonic 
gradient, and let curll = gradF; let ld be the expansion and w the vorticity of 
a motion in a region v such that 
1. Each finite boundary is stationary, and upon it the material adheres without 
slipping; 
2. In any portion of v which extends to oo 
then 
(Fp + pxl)n = o(p-2); 
f[F Id +I . w J d V = 0. V 
(116.6) 
(116.7) 
A simple condition sufficient for (116.6) is Fpn=o(r- 2), (PXI)n=o(r 2). 
An immediate corollary of (116.7), following from the choice 1=0, F=1, 
is the vanishing of the total expansion : 
flddv = 0. 
" 
Putting h =const in (116.3) and employing (116.8) yields 
hxfwdv =0, 
" 
whence, since h is arbitrary, follows 
Jwdv = 0: 
" 
(116.8) 
(116.9) 
(116.10) 
In a motionsuchthat both the linear balance theorems hold, the total vorticity vanishes. 
We shall discover a broad generalization of this result in Sect. 118. 
For the case of a motion in a finite simply connected domain, it is possible 
to show2 that either (116.7) by itself or (116.3) combined with (105.2) is sufficient 
that assigned functions Id and w be the expansion and the vorticity of the motion 
of a material adhering to the boundary of v. That (116.3) is not by itself sufficient is plain from the example Id =0, w =gradp-1 when the bounding surface <1 
1 TRUESDELL [ 19 51, 31]. The special case I d = 0 for a finite domain is given by BERKER 
[1949. 1, Th. I]. 
2 TRUESDELL [1951, 30 and 31]. The results were asserted also by VAN DEN DUNGEN 
[1951, 37] and SYNGE [1951, 25], but their proofs are incomplete. 
Sect. 117. The theorems of LAMB, PorNCARE, J. J. THOMSON, and BJ0RGUM. 399 
is a pair of concentric spheres, since then we have 
J hxwdv = f hxgradp-1dv = Jcurl(Qgradp-1)dv,) P V V 
= ~dax Q gradp-1 = o . 
• 
(116.11) 
Forthisspecial case, then, the condition ( 116-3) is satisfied, but upon the spherical op-1 boundaries we have Wn = ---ap = -p-2 =f=O, whence by (105.2) it follows that 
the material cannot adhere to the boundary. 
When applied to the special case of a plane motion, both (116.3) and {116.7) 
yield1 
j(GI<t-Hw)da=O, (116.12) 6 
where H and G are any pair of conjugate harmonic functions. When d is finite 
and simply connected, (116.12) is sufficient that Id and w be the expansion and 
the vorticity of a material adhering to the boundary. 
117. The theorems of LAMB, POINCARE, J. J. THOMSON, and BJORGUM. 
Leaving behind the connections between vorticity and expansion, we shall now 
learn the regularities inherent in the distribution of rotation alone by establishing theorems concerning the average value of the vorticity itself. The first such 
results discovered concern only isochoric motions, upon which we now fix our 
attention. Since in an isochoric motion the velocity field is solenoidal, we may 
put c = p in (App. 31.7), so obtaining a simple formula for the total Lamb vector. 
This formula shows that for an isochoric motion in a finite stationary domain, the 
average value of w X p is determined by the speed on the bounding surfaces; in the 
case when the speed is constant on each closed boundary surface, the average value 
of w X p is zero. More generally, by replacing c by p in the italicized statement 
following (App.31.7), we obtain Lamb's vorticity average theorem2 : In an 
isochoric motion, if all finite boundaries are stationary and the material adheres to 
them, while in any portion of the material extending to infinity p Pn = ö (p- 2), 
p2 = o (p-2) , then 
fwxpdv =0; (117.1) 
" 
that is, the average value of the Lamb vector is zero. The property which defines the 
dass of irrotational and screw motions, i.e., w x p = 0, thus has been shown to 
hold on the average for a much greater dass of motions. A simple sufficient condition at oo isp=o(p-1). 
By putting c = p in (App. 31.16) we similarly obtain a formula for the total moment of the Lamb vector; hence follows Poincare 's vorticity average theorem 3 : 
In an isochoric motion, if all finite boundaries are stationary and the material 
adheres to them, while in any portion of the material extending to infinity p X PPn = 
o(p-2), p2pt =o(p-2), then 
fpx(wxp)dv =0. (117.2) 
A simple sufficient condition at oo is p = o (p-ß). 
Three other vorticity theorems may be obtained by putting c = p in (App. 31.23), 
(App. 31.25), and (App. 31.21). The surface integrals in these formulae vanish when 
1 SYNGE [1950, 31]. Special cases had been obtained earlier by HAMEL [1911, 6, p. 266] 
SYNGE [1936, 9, § 2], and KAMPE DE FERIET [1946, 6] [1947, 8]. 
2 [1879, 2, § 136]. 3 [1893. 6, § 115]. 
400 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 118. 
the velocity is tangent to o, andin the case of an infinite region, when Pn =o (p-3), 
o(p-4), o(p-4), respectively. The interest in these formulae 1 lies in the fact that 
when the motion is isochoric they express the momentum and the moment of 
momentum of the material in v in terms of the vorticity and the normal component of velocity upon the boundary (cf. Sect. 166). 
Finally, consider the case when the Monge representation (99.19) is valid 
over an entire motion. For the abnormality (App.30.1h we obtain 
p2 A = p. w = gradH · gradFxgradG,) 
= div (H grad F X grad G), 
= div(Hw), 
(117.3) 
where the last step follows by (99.20). Integration over the volume yields the 
vorticity average theorem of Bjorgum2: When His single-valued, 
f p2A dv =~da· wH. (117.4) .. . H ence in a region on all whose finite boundaries w is tangential, while in any portion 
extending to oo H w n = o (p-2), we have 
f p2A dv = o; (117.5) .. in such a region, then, if the motion is not complex-lamellar, the abnormality A 
must assume both positive and negative values. In particular, the theorem holds 
for a motion in a finite domain to whose walls the material adheres 3• 
An interesting formula for the total squared vorticity follows from the substitution 
c = w in (App. 31.12), permissible because w is solenoidal'. This formula expresses the total 
squared vorticity in terms of the boundary values of w and interior values of curl w X w. In 
particular, if w vanishes on the boundary and curl w X w vanishes in the interior, it 
follows that w vanishes everywhere. 
118. The vorticity moment theorem. Since the vorticity field is solenoidal, 
we may put c =W in (App.31.3), thus obtaining5 
!S<Kl = f {p<Klw} dv =~da. wp<K+ll: (1-18.1) .. . 1 MOREAU [1948, 16] [1949, 20] [1950, 18] [1952, 13, §§ 14-22] has studied the rates 
of change of (App.31.23) and (App.31.25) in an isochoric motion, expressing them in terms of the 
resultant force and moment of force of any non-conservative extrinsic forces. Proofs of essentially equivalent but purely kinematical formulae based on the decomposition (124.1) were 
given byTRUESDELL [1951, 28, § 8). MOREAU noted also some alternative forms of (App. 31.25) 
which are easily obtained by contracting (App. 31.3) in the case K = 2. He emphasized the application of his results to a limitless fluid, all but a finite interior part of which is in irrotational 
or circulation preserving motion. Iri this connection we should beware of the extremely 
strong order conditions at oo required in order to get simple results, order conditions, indeed, 
which possibly ·may never be satisfied except in trivial cases. 2 [1951, 2, § 6.6]. 3 It is worth noting that an the right-hand side in (117.4) H may be replaced by F, which 
is necessarily single-valued, or by G, assumed single-valued, provided w be replaced by 
grad G X grad H or grad H X grad F, respectively. Thus in case any of one of the functions F, 
G, H vanishes on a closed surface, the result (117.5) follows independently of any further 
hypothesis regarding w. 4 TRUESDELL [1951, 29]. 
5 The case K = 0 was apparently known to A. FöPPL [ 1897, 4, § § 4, 32] and was 
stated by MuNK [1941, 4, Eq. (7)]. The general formula and its consequences were derived 
by TRUESDELL [1949, 35] [1951, 28, § 11]; the invariance of the result with respect to change 
of the origin of the position vector was checked in [1954, 24, § 65]. 
Sect. 119. A general vorticity average. 401 
All the moments S<Kl of the vorticity field over any region v are independent of 
conditions at interior points, being completely determined by the normal component 
of vorticity upon the boundary oj, This purely kinematical statement indicates the 
predominant effect of boundaries upon vorticity. It may be regarded as asserting 
that the familiar hydrodynamical theorem that vorticity cannot be generated 
in the interior of a homogeneous viscous liquid subject to conservative extrinsic 
force, but must be diffused inward from the boundaries, continues to hold for 
arbitrary continuous media, provided it be expressed in terms of the average 
rather than the local vorticity. 
Now upon a stationary boundary to which the material adheres, by (105.2) 
the normal component of vorticity vanishes, and thus in any motion bounded 
by finite stationary walls to which the material adheres, all moments l!S<K> vanish. 
The case K =0 has already been derived as (116.10). By formulating more 
general conditions sufficient for the vanishing of the surface integral on the righthand side of ( 118.1), we obtain the following vorticity moment theorem: Subfeet 
to the boundary conditions 
Wn = 0 Or Wn = o(p-K-3), 
the first K + 1 moments of vorticity vanish1• 
(118.2) 
For the special case of a motion enclosed by finite stationary boundaries to 
which the material adheres, our several investigations in Sects. 112 to 113 and 
Sects. 115 to 118 have revealed a high degree of regularity: The motion is almost 
certainly rotational (if isochoric, certainly rotational), the intensity balance theorem 
holds, the linear balance theorems hold, and all the moments tm<Kl are zero. It is to 
be bornein mind that no restriction regarding the connectivity has been presupposed, and indeed the main interest here is in the case of multiply connected 
regions. 
119. A generat vorticity average. Since w is solenoidal, we may put c =W 
in (App.J1.5) and obtain 
Jw·gradWdv =~da·ww. (119.1) " 6 
Thus 2 for any twice continuously dilferentiable quantity W, the total w · grad W 
in a region is completely determined by the values of W and of the normal component 
of vorticity Wn upon the boundary. The vorticity moment theorem (118.1) is the 
special W =p<K+ll in (119.1). 
Another special case has been obtained by BERKER3• First, put 'V= B and write f= 
gradBin (119.1): 
fw-fdv=~da·wB. 
"· 6 
(119.2) 
By formulating conditions sufficient for the vanishing of the surface integral we obtain the 
following vorticity average theorem: Given a motion in a region v such that upon any finite 
boundaries the normal component of vorticity vanishes, let B be a twice continuously difterentiable 
scalar and put f=grad B; if in any portion of v extending to oo we have Bwn=ö(p-2), then 
Jw·fdv=O. (119.3) 
" 
The conditions of this theorem are satisfied by the material within a closed vortex tube of 
any continuous motion; by the entire material of any continuous motion in a bounded domain 
upon whose boundaries w = 0; and for any such motion within finite stationary boundaries 
1 A special case of the case K = 0 was given by A. FÖPPL [1897, 4, §§ 4, 32]. 2 TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 66]. 3 [1949, 1, Th. II]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 26 
402 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 120, 121. 
to which the material adhcres without slipJ;Jing. Putting I= p = grad tp2, we obtain 
fp·wdv=O, (119.4) 
" a result which follows equally by taking the scalar of the equation m(l) = o. 
The form of the result ( 119.3) coincides with that of the special case Id= 0 of ( 116. 7) 
but the conditions under which the two statements hold are somewhat different. For the 
validity of (119.3) it is required that curli=O, but the motion need not be isochoric, while 
for the special case of ( 116. 7) valid in an isochoric motion it is sufficient that curl curl I= 0. 
. The completeness of the set of theorems of vorticity average has been investigated by 
HoWARD1 • He has shown that, within a certain algebraic dass, for general motions there 
are no additional theorems beyond those obtained by linear combination of the results in 
Sect. 118; for isochoric motions, there are in addi tion not only those obtained in Sect. 11 7 
but also 
f {J · w dv = p da· (rd: + x X {J). 
" d 
(119.5) 
where curl fJ = grad oc. 
It is possible to obtain further vorticity average theorems only by extending the algebraic 
classes considered by HowARD (e.g., the results of Sect. 116 and some of those of Sect. 119 
arenot included), or by narrowing the class of motions. 
e 111) Bernoullian theorems. 
120. The nature of Bernoullian theorems. For an irrotational motion, the 
speed is related to the acceleration potential by EuLER's formula (109.3), which 
we now write in the form 
(120.1) 
This formula gives the essential content of what in classical hydrodynamics is 
called Bernoulli's theorem. Since it would be inappropriate here to tarry over 
hydrodynamical details 2, we rest content with the remark that (120.1) serves 
to suggest for rotational motions a search for properties of the specific kinetic 
energy !P2 or the specific motive energy S*+!p2, where S* is defined by (102.5). 
In such relations, naturally, !P2 or S* + !P2 should be determined by something 
less than a knowledge of the velocity field as a function of place and time. 
The basic formulae on which the analysis rests are, first, the Stokesresolution 
(102.5) of the acceleration field in terms of its scalar potential 5* and vector 
potential 1?*, and second, LAGRANGE's formula (99.14) for the acceleration, in 
which w X p, the Lamb vector, is of central interest. 
Using these two formulae, we shall find classes of motions for which !P2 
or S* + !p2 has particularly simple properties. 
121. Poisson equations for the specific energy. By (102.6) any of the expressions for div p given in Sect. 102 may be written in the form 172 S* = .... 
All results of this type express properties common to all motions whose accelerations 
have the same scalar potential, whatever the vector potential may be. 
First, from (102.8)1 we have 3 
!72( S* + ~ p2) =- ooit" + div(p xw)' l 
(121.1) o Id 2 • 1 = - fit + w - p · cur w. 
1 [1957. 8]. 2 The connection of this formulation with that usual in hydrodynamics is explained by 
TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 68]. Forahistory of the researches of DANIEL BERNOULLI, jOHN I 
BERNOULLI, and EULER in this connection, see TRUESDELL [1954, 25, Parts IV and VI]. 3 Special cases are due to BaBYLEW [1873. 1, § 4], FoRSYTH [1879. 1, p. 139]. CRAIG 
[1880, 5, pp. 223-225] [1880, 7, p. 274], and RoWLAND [1880, 9, p. 268]. 
Sect. 121. Poisson equations for the specific energy. 403 
As a corollary it follows that in any motion with steady expansion, in order that 
the specific motive energy be harmonic: 
172 {5* + tp2) = 0, {121.2) 
it is necessary and sufficient that the Lamb vector be solenoidal. In particular, 
(121.2) holds in any irrotational or screw motion in which the expansion is steady. 
As a further corollary it follows that in an irrotational or screw motion filling 
alt space, if the expansion is steady and if the specific motive energy S* + t p2 is 
uniformly bounded, then the classical Bernoulli theorem holds1: 
S* + t P2 = I (t) . {121.3) 
This result extends (120.1) besides viewing it from a different aspect. 
From ( 121.1) may be read off conditions that 5* + ip2 be subharmonic or superharmonic, 
and hence follow extremal theorems for 5* + ip2 • Unfortunately it does not seem easy to 
put in kin.ematically informative terms the conditions so obtained. We note 2 that if the 
expansion nowhere increases and if the vectors p and curl w nowhere subtend an acute angle 
then V2 5* ~ 0, and hence 5* + !p2 cannot experience a maximum at an interior point. 
For S* itself, however, elegantly simple results may be obtained. We begin 
with the identity 2 
(121.4) 
which is immediate from {102.1)4 and {102.6). For the special case id=O, HAMEL3 
has remarked that since ~ 0, Ild~ 0, we may obtain bounds for J7 2 S*, viz., 
in a motion in which the expansion remains constant for each particle we have 
{121.5) 
This result, which holds a fortiori for isochoric motions, may be expressed in 
terms of the vorticity number WK of Sect. 91 : 
172 5* 1 -- > ---- iw2 = Wk · 
More generally, either from {121.4) or from {102.7) we have 
-J72 5*=id+IId(1-Wi), 
( 121.6) 
{121.7) 
inspection of which yields the following results: In a non-rigid motion, sufficient 
conditions for S* to be superharmonic, harmonic, or subharmonic, respectively, are 
id ~ 0 and WK ~ 1; id= 0 and WK= 1; id ~ 0 and WK ~ 1. In the special case 
when id=O the value of WK becomes the sole criterion of the character of 5*. 
Hence follow conclusions regarding various types of motion: first, the ma;rimum 
theorem for motions in which WK ~ 1 : Given a motion in which the expansion 
experienced by a particle does not increase (id ~ 0), the greatest value of the scalar 
potential S* in a region where WK ~ 1 cannot be attained in the interior but must be 
attained on the boundary; and, second, the minimum theorem for motions in 
1 TRUESDELL[1954, 24, § 70]. 2 Special cases were given by RowLAND [1880, 9, p. 267], GosiEWSKI [1890, 3, §§ 3-4], 
LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 10, § 6], and LAGALLY [1937, 4]. 3 [1936, 4, § 1]. As had been observed by GosiEWSKI [1890, 3, § 8], from (121.4) it follows 
that the condition 
- 17 2 5* = lld - i w2 
is necessary and sufficient that a material volume once in isochoric motion remain ever in 
isochoric motion. 
26* 
404 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 122. 
which WK ~ 1 : Given a motion in which the expansion experienced by a particle 
does not decrease (id;;;; 0), the least value of S* in a region where WK ~ 1 cannot be 
attained in the interior, but must be attained on the boundary1• The former theorem 
includes the case of rigid motion (WK = oo, Id = 0); the latter, the case of irrotational motion (WK = 0); both include the case Id = 0, WK = 1, which was mentioned 
from another point of view in Sect. 91. 
For irrotational or screw motions, an analogaus result can be obtained for 
the speedp, generalizing KELVIN's theorem in Sect.102. By (121.7) and (121.1) 
when w X p = 0 we get 
17 2 2 1 P
• 2 = ~d • - Tt old + -
IId ( 1 - "Wk) , l = p . grad Id + IId ( 1 - "Wk) . (121.8) 
By formulating conditions sufficient that the right-hand side have a given sign, 
we derive the theorem of m~imum speed for irrotational or screw 
motions 2 : In a region of irrotational or screw motion suchthat WK ~ 1 (WK = 1) 
(WK;;;; 1), while the expansion Id does not decrease (change) (increase) in the direction of motion along a stream line, then at an interior point the speed cannot 
experience a maximum (maximum or minimum) (minimum). In the irrotational 
case, of course, WK = 0, so the results concerning minimum speed do not apply. 
A corollary is that in a region of isochoric screw motion where l»K;;;; 1 there can 
be no stagnation point. 
By applying PmssoN's integral from the theory of the potential, it is possible from the 
Poisson equations given above to write down various expressions for S* or for S* + J:p2 
as a volume integrai3. 
122. Lamb planes and Lamb surfaces. In a motion which is neither an irrotational nor a screw motion the vorticity w and velocity p differ in direction, 
except possibly at certain singular points, lines, or surfaces, and hence at each 
regular point determine the Lamb plane, whose normal is parallel to the Lamb 
vector w x p. A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of Lamb 
surfaces 4 , which are simultaneously vortex surfaces and stream surfaces, is that 
the Lamb vector wxp be complex-lamellar and non-vanishing. By the EulerKelvin criterion (App. 33-5) it is then necessary arid sufficient that 
wxp-curl(wxp)=O, wxp=j=O, (122.1) 
a condition which may be put into the form 
wxp· (p·gradw-w-gradp)=O. (122.2) 
By eliminating wxp between (122.1) and LAGRANGE's acceleration formula 
(99.14), we may obtain a form of the condition for the existence for Lamb surfaces which though lacking the symmetry of (122.2) is nevertheless easier to apply·, 
viz. 
w x p · ( w*- 8
87) = o. (122.3) 
1 These broad generalizations of results of BauLIGAND [1927, 1 and 2] and of HAMEI. 
[1936, 4, § 1] were given by TRUESDELL [1953, 31, § 10]. 
2 TRUESDELL [1953, 34]. 
3 BaBYLEW [1873, 1, § 4], FoRSYTH [1879, 1, p. 139], CRAIG [1880, 5, pp. 223-225] 
[1880, 7, p. 276], TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 71]. 
' These surfaces were introduced by LAMB [1878, 5] [1879, 2, § 145]. Cf. POINCARE 
[1893, 6, §§ 22-24], APPELL [1921, 1, § 762]. The name "Bernoulli surfaces" was proposed 
by CALDONAZZO [1924, 2] [1925, 3, § 2] in a somewhat different sense. 
Sect. 123. The line integral Bernoulli theorem. 405 
By the d'Alembert-Euler condition (108.1) it follows then that Lamb surfaces 
exist in any circulation preserving motion with steady vorticity. 
Equivalently, for the existence of Lamb surfaces it is necessary and sufficient 
that there exist a non-constant scalar B and a non-vanishing scalar C such that 
w X p = C grad B. (122.4) 
The surfaces B =const are the Lamb surfaces, and B must satisfy the differential 
system 
(w xp) x grad B = o. (122.5) 
For a very simple example of Lamb surfaces in motions which need not be circulation 
preserving, consider the case when the convective acceleration vanishes: 
.. öp 
p= fit' (122.6) 
Then by (99-14) follows 
(122.7) 
Thus the surfaces of constant speed are Lamb surfaces. Moreover, by (99-7) it follows that 
if the stream lines are steady, they are straight, and the speed is constant along them at 
each instant 1. Thus the Lamb surfaces are ruled by the stream lines. 
Since both stream and vortex lines lie upon the Lamb surfaces (if these exist), these 
surfaces tagether with the stream surfaces and vortex surfaces normal to them form three 
one-parameter families of surfaces, and hence serve to define a natural curvilinear co-ordinate 
system 2 . 
The following statements are but immediate applications of a classical theorem of 
DARBOUX 3. 
(a) In a complex-lamellar motion with Lamb surfaces, the vorticity is complex-lamellar if 
and only if the vortex lines are lines of curvature both an the Lamb surfaces and an the surfaces 
normal to the velocity. 
(b) In a motion in which both the velocity and the vorticity are complex-lamellar, Lamb 
surfaces exist if and only if the stream lines are lines of curvature an the surfaces normal to 
the vorticity, while the vortex lines are lines of curvature an the surfaces normal to the velocity. 
(c) In a motion with Lamb surfaces and with complex-lamellar vorticity, the motion itself 
is complex-lamellar if and only if the stream lines are lines of curvature both an the Lamb surfaces 
and an the surfaces normal to the vorticity. 
In a steady motion, the Lamb surfaces, since they are stream surfaces, are 
material surfaces (Sect. 74), and since they are also vortex surfaces, it follows 
that in any steady motion such that curl p is zero or normal to the Lamb vector 
there exist stationary surfaces which are both stream surfaces and vortex surfaces. 
123. The line integral Bernoulli theorem. If Pt uenotes the component of 
acceleration along any direction t which lies in the Lamb plane, and dfd s1 derrotes 
the directional derivative in that direction, then from ( 111.9), which is valid only 
in motions with steady vorticity, it follows that 4 
Pt= d~~ ( {- p2 + u). (123.1) 
A curve which is everywhere tangent to the Lamb planes is a Lamb curve cL. 
Both stream lines and vortex lines are Lamb curves, and in a motion where 
Lamb surfaces exist any curve lying wholly upon some one of them is a Lamb 
curve. If we integrate ( 123.1) along a Lamb curve we obtain the line integral 
1 CASTOLDI [1953, 5]. 2 CRAIG [1881, 2, pp. 5-6] used as co-ordinate surfaces thc Lamb surfaces (which he 
incorrectly assumed always to exist), any independent family of stream surfaces, and any 
independent family of vortex surfaces. 3 [ 1866, 1, ~ 15]. 4 FABRI [1894, 3]. 
406 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 124 
Bemoulli theorem: 
(j P2 + U}ieL = J d:x! · p: (123.2) eL 
In a motion with steady vorticity, the flow of acceleration along a Lamb curve at 
any instant equals the diflerence of the values of !P2+ U at the two ends of the curve. 
In particular, in a motion with steady vorticity the circulation of the acceleration 
around a closed Lamb curve is zero. In a steady motion, since U = const the 
line integral Bernoulli theorem gives a direct connection between speed and 
acceleration. For any particular dynamical model the acceleration is expressed 
in terms of other quantities (cf. Chap. G), and (123.2) then shows directly the 
effect of these quantities upon the speed of flow1 . 
124. The curvilinear Bernoulli theorem. Now in general it is possible to express any vector, and in particular the acceleration p, as the sum of a gradient 
plus a second field in an infinite nurober of ways: 
p =- grad Q + p*. (124.1) 
The function Q may be the Stokes scalar potential 5*, the negative of the Monge 
potential H*, or some other function. We shall assume that Q=!=const, so that 
(124.1) really expresses a decomposition of the acceleration field, and we 
shall assume furtner that at least one possible choice of Q be such that 2 
p*=!=wxp. Wehave 
w*=curlp=curlp*. (124.2) 
As suggested by the results in Sect.101, weshall call p* the diffusive acceleration, 
taking care to recall ever that this field is determined only to within an arbitrary 
gradient. The numerous theorems to follow in whose statements reference to 
the diffusive acceleration occurs may be divided into two classes. Those which 
essentially employ only curl p* are single statements, but those which employ 
p* itself are really an infinity of statements, one for each admissible choice of p*. 
In a motion with steady vorticity, comparison of (124.1} with (111.9} yields 
grad(Q + U +! p2) = pxw + p* =I= 0. (124.3) 
Suppose p x w =!= 0, and at each point let t be a vector determined by the intersection of the Lamb plane with the plane normal to p*. Then by taking the dot 
product of (124.3) with t we obtain 
t ·grad(Q + U + tP2) = 0. (124.4} 
Now the field t is a tangent field for a certain congruence of Lamb curves, determined by the condition that they be normal to the field p*. From (124.4} follows 
then the curvilinear Bemoulli theorem3 : In a motion with steady vorticity, let 
the curves cL be the Lamb curves normal to the diffusive acceleration field. Then 
(124.5} 
that is, along any one of these curves at any one instant the expression on the left 
has a constant value. It is possible that some admissible diffusive acceleration 
1 An example was given by CARSTOIU [1947. 3, Chap. VI, § 3]. 
2 From a kinematical point of view the foregoing statements are trivial. Dynamically, 
however, a medium is defined by specifying the acceleration, and thus some one decomposition 
may have particular physical significance. 3 TRUESDELL [1954. 24, § 74]. Special cases involving the determination of particular 
Lamb curves in the motion of viscous fluids were given earlier by SBRANA [1931, 9], CASTOLDI 
[1948, 6], and TRUESDELL [1950, 33]. 
Sect. 125. The superficial Bernoulli theorem. 407 
field p* be parallel to the Lamb vector w X p but unequal to it. In this case the 
result (124.5) holds for any Lamb curve. 
In the special case of steady motion, the curvilinear Bernoulli theorem 
(124.5) assumes a simpler form: 
Q+iP2 =f(cL). (124.6) 
Thus upon each of the curves cL there is a finite least.upper bound Q ( cL) for Q, 
attained ( if at all) at and only at a stagnation point: 
so that (124.6) becomes 
(124.7) 
(124.8) 
If further there is a finite greatest lower bound Q( cJ for Q on some particular 
Lamb curve er_, then on that same curve there ;"ust be a finite upper bound p 
for the speed: 
iP2=Q -Q. (124.9) 
An equivalent form for ( 124.6) then is 
t .(p2- />2) = Q - Q. (124.10) 
From these last results follow the principal applications of BERNOULLI's theorem 
in hydrodynamics. One of these, for example, consists in the observation that 
if Q = const upon one of the curves, then the speed also must be constant upon 
that curve. 
125. The superficial Bemoulli theorem. We consider now a motion in which 
Lamb surfaces exist andin which also the vorticity is steady. By inserting (122.4) 
and (124.1) into (111.9) we then obtain 
If further 
then 
grad(Q + U + tp2) = p*- C grad B. (125.1) 
p* =EgradB, 
grad ( Q + U + t f• 2) = (E - C) grad B, 
(125.2) 
(125.3) 
whence it follows that Q + U + t p2 is constant upon each of the Lamb surfaces 
B =const. We may state this result as the superficial Bernoulli theorem1 : 
In a motion where Lamb surfaces <JL exist and where the vorticity is steady, if it 
is possible to find a ditfusive acceleration field p* which is zero or normal to the 
Lamb surfaces, then 
(125.4) 
That is, the expression on the left is constant upon each of the Lamb surfaces at 
each instant. 
Consider now the case of a circulation preserving motion with steady vorticity. 
As was shown in Sect. 122, Lamb surfaces do indeed exist. By (109.1) we may 
put Q =V*, p*=O in (124.1), and hence (124.3) becomes 
pxw = grad(U +V*+ iP2). (125.5) 
1 TRUESDELL [ 1954. 24, § 7 5]. In any motion, it is possible to define certain surfaces 
by the condition Q + U + ~ p2 = const, but these do not generally enjoy particularly simple 
kinematical properties; cf. CASTOLDI [1953, 4]. 
408 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 126. 
The foregoing theorem applies, and (125.4) follows. Conversely, suppose that 
(125.5) holds; from LAGRANGE's acceleration formula (99.14) we then obtain 
p = ~1-- grad(U +V*), (125.6) 
and hence w*=8wj8t. Thus w*=O if and only if 8wj8t=O. In summary of 
the foregoing analysis we may state then that in a circulation preserving motion 
with steady vorticity, Lamb surfaces 'OlL exist, and 
( 125.7) 
Conversely, in a motionsuchthat Lamb surfaces exist and (125.5) holds, the motion 
is circulation preserving if and only if the vorticity is steady. As a corollary follows 
the Lamb characterization oj steady circulation preserving motion 1 : F or 
a circulation preserving motion to be steady it is both necessary and sufficient that 
Lamb surfaces exist and that · 
(125.8) 
where djdn denotes differentiation in a direction normal to the Lamb surface. The 
formula (125.8) is but an alternative expression for (125.5) in the special case 
of steady motion. The statement that (125.7) actually holds in a circulation preserving motion with steady vorticity we may call the Lamb-Masotti 2 form oj 
Bernoulli's theorem. In particular, U +V*+ iP2 is a function of time only 
along each stream line 3, along each vortex line 4, and along any Lamb curve 5 • 
Under conditions sufficient for the validity of (125.7), the finite upper and 
lower bounds discussed in Sect. 124 exist more generally and refer to a whole 
Lamb surface, rather than to a single Lamb curve. 
126. The spatial Bernoulli theorem. In any irrotational motion, steady or 
not, we have the formula of EULER (120.1), andin any steady screw motion we 
have (112.3). Recalling that in an unsteady irrotational motion U =- 8Vjöt, 
we may write both these results in a single formula, obtaining the spatial 
Bernoulli theorem: In any irrotational motion andin any steady screw motion 
1 [1878, 5] [1879. 2, § 145]. A special case had been discovered previously by CoTTERILL 
[1876, 2]. The derivation above is based upon that of BASSET [1888, 1, § 39]. Cf. also CLEBSCH 
[1857. 1, § 5]. CRAIG [1880, 5, p. 220] [1880, 6, PP· 344-347]. POINCARE [1893. 6, §§ 23-24]. 2 [1927, 7, § 3]. A Bernoulli theorem for a special class of steady circulation preserving 
complex-lamellar motions is obtained by OswATITSCH [1956, 17] [his Eq. (4) is only a special 
solution of his Eq. (3)]. 3 In a sense, the hydraulic statements of D. and J. BERNOULLI may be regarded as 
assertions pertaining to a single stream line. As a hydrodynamical theorem for plane steady 
flow, the "Bernoulli equation for the stream lines" was first derived by EuLER in 17 51 
[1767, 1, §§ 18-20] by a remarkable analysis in a partially material description. The result 
in three-dimensionalsteadyflowis also EuLER's [1757. 3, §§ S0-52], andin [1757, 3, §§ 58to 
59] he showed that specialization of his general analytical expressions yields 
V* + iP2 = J r {Jz dr + i r2 {Jz = J r w 2 dr + i r2 w2 
for the specific energy of motion of a stream line of a plane steady vortex (Sect. 89). as is 
evident from first principles. STOKES regarded the general theorem as weil known [ 1842, 4, 
p. 1]. Cf. also CLEBSCH [1857. 1, § 5], BASSET [1888, 1, § 39]. 
4 lt was stated incorrectly by CisoTTI [1923, 3, § 2] that these are the only curves upon 
which V*+ i p2 is constant in a steady motion of this type; the error was corrected by 
SEGRE [1923, 4, § 4, footnote]. 6 Certain Lamb curves occurring in certain special motions are remarked by PoPov 
[1951,19]. 
Sects. 127, 128. KELVIN's proofs of the Helmholtz theorems. 409 
the acceleration potential S* satisfies 
U + S* + i P2 = 0, (126.1) 
where in the case of steady motion U reduces to a constant. This result is a slight 
generalization of the classical Bernoulli-Euler theorem discussed in Sect. 120. 
Under conditions sufficient for the validity of (126.1), the finite upper and 
lower bounds discussed in Sect. 124 exist more generally and refer to the whole 
motion rather than to a particular Lamb curve. 
Conversely, suppose that in a circulation preserving motion with steady 
vorticity the spatial theorem (126.1) holds. Since by (111.9) and (109.1) we have 
grad (!P2 + U + S*) + wxp = o, (126.2) 
from ( 126.1) it follows that 
wxp = o. (126.3) 
W e ha ve thus proved the characterization of Stokes 1 ; In a circulation preserving motion with steady vorticity, in order that the spatial Bernoulli theorem 
hold it is both necessary and sufficient that the motion be an irrotational motion or 
a steady screw motion. 
e IV) Convection and diffusion of vorticity. 
127. Aim and plan of the analysis of convection and diffusion of vorticity. In 
Sect. 101 we have given the essential formulae governing the convection and 
diffusion of stretching and spin. In the case of the spin tensor, or, equivalently, 
the vorticity vector, the distinction represented by the two corresponding portions 
of (101.9) and (101.11) is striking. Motions in which there is no diffusion of vorticity are characterized as circulation preserving; alternatively, the D'AlembertEuler condition (108.1) or the equivalent Hankel-Appell condition (108-3) is 
necessary and sufficient for circulation preserving motion. The Helmholtz 
theorems (Sect. 108) furnish yet another defining condition. Circulation preserving motions occur in classical hydrodynamics and in a sense may be said to 
characterize it. They have been studied with intensity and perseverance for two 
centuries, and though a large mathematical structure has grown up about them, 
their secrets are far from exhausted, and interesting new researches concerning 
them continue to appear. 
The viewpoint we adopt is the most general. Insofar as possible, in each 
case we shall outline analysis applicable to all continuous motions, thereafter 
particularizing the result to the circulation preserving case. However, so as to 
point up the enlightening simplicity of circulation preserving motions, we begin 
by reversing this order and following a line of argument appropriate only when 
the circulation of each material circuit is constant in time. 
128. KELVIN's proofs of the Helmholtz theorems 2• To prove the second 
Helmholtz theorem, we compute the circulation around a material circuit '(j which 
at time t1 lies entirely upon a given vortex surface irand is reducible upon it. 
By (106.1), the circulation about '(j is zero at time t1 • At time t2 the particles 
initially comprising the vortex surface if" constitute a new surface w, which 
we do not know to be a vortex surface. Upon it lies c, the present locus of the 
1 STOKES [1842, 4, pp. 2-3] thus demonstrated the formula (126.3} for steady motion 
but erroneously concluded therefrom that w = o. See Sect. App. 34. 2 KELVIN [ 1869, 7, §§ 60 (f) -60 (i); §§ 59 (d), 60 (q)]. The third theorem had been proved 
previously in essentially the same way by HANKEL [1861, 1, § 9], who had used a different 
method for the more difficult second theorem [ibid., § 11]. 
410 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 129. 
particles comprising r/. Since the motion is circulation preserving, the circulation 
about c is zero, and hence by KELVIN's transformation (87.1) we have 
O=~d~·p=fda-w, (128.1) c 6 
where d is the portion of w inclosed by c. But r/ is an arbitrary circuit upon ifl; 
by the continuity of motion, it follows that c is an arbitrary circuit upon w; 
therefore d is an arbitrary portion of w, and hence, finally, (128.1) implies that 
da · w = 0 upon w. Consequently w is a vortex surface. Since vortex lines 
are the curves of intersection of vortex surfaces, and since all vortex surfaces 
are material surfaces, the vortex lines are materiallines. Q.E.D. 
To prove the third Helmholtz theorem, we recall that by KELVIN's transformation the strength of a vortex tube equals the circulation about any curve 
once embracing it, and from HELMHOLTz's second theorem, in a circulation 
preserving motion a material curve once lying upon a vortex tube always lies 
upon the same vortex tube. Since the circulation about this curve is constant 
during the motion, the strength of the vortex tube is constant during the motion. 
Conversely, if the vortex lines are material and the strengths of the vortex tubes 
constant in time, it follows by KELVIN's transformation that the circulation 
about any circuit once embracing a vortex tube is constant in time, but since 
any circuit defines a vortex tube, the motion is circulation preserving. Q.E.D. 
129. Some aspects of the diffusion of vorticity. The vivid geometrical picture 
at the basis of the arguments of the last section is available only in the circulation 
preserving case. To find the effect of diffusion upon the circulation and the 
vortex lines, we must revert to formulae. 
First, let r/ be a material line, not necessarily a closed circuit, and from 
(79.2) 2 calculate the rate of change of ~ d~ · p, the flow along it, obtaining1 
'6 
:t J d~ · p = J d~ · [P + grad-} p2], I 
'6 '6 (129.1) 
= ;a~·P+ ~p21'6· 
When r/ is a closed circuit, we have simply 
:t ~d~. p = f d~. p: (129.2) 
'6 '6 
The material rate of change of circulation equals the circulation of the acceleration. 
By KELVIN's transformation, an equivalent formula is 2 
!_i-.a~. p = !__ {aa · w = {aa · curlp (129.3) dt 'j' dt • • • '6 [/ [/ 
where !/' is a surface bounded by r/. 
When the curve 'lf is instantaneously a Lamb curve in a motion with steady vorticity, 
we may eliminate either the line integral or the speed from (129.1) and (123.2). thus obtaining 
d~ J dx·p = 2 J dx·p- uj<cL' l 'lfL 'lfL 
= (p2 + U) I ... L. 
1 KELVIN [1869, 7, § 59(c)J, BELTRAMI [1871, J, § 12]. 2 FöPPL [1897, 4, § 31]. 
(129.4) 
Sect. 129. Some aspects of the diffusion of vorticity. 411 
Two major special cases follow: The circulation about a closed material Lamb curve is constant, and in a steady motion the rate of change of the flow along a material Lamb curve is 
the difference between the squared speed at the two ends. These last results become selfevident when the Lamb curve is a stream line. Another interesting special case may be 
obtained by choosing as the Lamb curve a vortex line: The circulation about a closed material 
vortex line in a steady motion is constant in time. In interpreting this result one must take 
care to recollect first that closed material vortex lines generally do not exist, and second 
that in any case they are not generally steady. 
We turn now to the change in flux of vorticity occasioned by diffusion. 
From (101.11) and (20.8) follows t 
tv ·da- W· dA= f W* dt ·dA. (129.5) 0 
Thus the vector W* is the time rate of change of flux of vorticity per unit initial 
area. It is this result, perhaps, which places the diffusion of vorticity in its 
clearest setting. KIRCHHOFF's proof1 of the third Helmholtz theorem (Sects. 108, 
128) is equivalent to annulling the material .diffusion vector W* in (129.5), 
whence follows 
w-da=W-dA, (129.6) 
an elegant formula which might be put into words as follows: The specific flux 
of vorticity for a parfiele does not change. 
To study the effect of diffusion on the vortex lines, from (101.9) we calculate 
equivalently. 
wkmdx"' = [waß + j w;q:~"x;ßdt] X~k X~". dx"',) 
=X~k[waß+ Jwtqx~"x;ßdt]dXß; 0 
dx x w = gradX. [dxx (w+ jw*at)]· 
0 
(129.7) 
( 129.8) 
KIRCHHOFF's proof of the second Helmholtz theorem is equivalent to the observation that in the circulation preserving case, when (108.3) holds, (129.8) yields 
dx X w = 0 if and only if dX X W = 0: (129.9) 
A material line initially a vortex line remains ever a vortex line. For general 
motions, (129.8) gives a quantitative measure of how for a material Iine which 
at time 0 was a vortex line has been turned away from the vortex line at time t 
by diffusion. 
The formulae (129.5) and (129.8) were obtained by TRUESDELL 2, who used them to formulate conditions that a material line be a vortex line at two different instants, or that a 
particular material surface element carry the same flux of vorticity at two different instants. 
For steady circulation preserving motion, a measure of convection in terms of stream 
tubes, vortex tubes, and the cells into which they decussate space has been constructed by 
ERTEL and KöHLER 3 • 
As is weil known from the researches of PoiNCARE and CARTAN 4 , virtually all the most 
important properties of the circulation preserving case may be generalized to motions in 
1 More precisely, both KIReRHOFF [1876, 2, Vorlesung 15, § 3] and STOKES (note added 
in 1883 reprint of [1848, 3]) gave indications of proofs of the second and third Helmholtz 
theorems following from CAUCHY's formula (134.1). The details were worked out by APPELL 
[1897, 1, § 8]. The history of the question has been written by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 861]. 
2 [ 1948, 36]. Related additional results were given by CARSTOIU [ 194 7, 3, Chap. IV] 
and TRUESDELL [1954, 24, §§ 86-88]. 3 [1949, 9]. A different proof of a more precise statement is given by TRUESDELL [1954, 
24, § 99]. Cf. also Sect. 163. 4 [1922, 2]. 
412 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 129. 
a space of any number of dimensions, provided those motions satisfy a variational principle 
of the form 
(129.10) 
where B is a linear differential form1, tlj.e variations being zero at t=t1 and t=t". 
Eq. (129.10) would seem tobe a severe restriction, but in fact a method of BATEMAN 2 enables 
us to cast any continuous motion into a form derivable from such a principle. Indeed, 
Bateman's function is given by 
{129.11) 
where y is an auxiliary vector field to be varied along with ;,: and where a is a vector field 
to be taken as given, not varied. Regard (x, y) as a 6-vector. Then the Euler equations of 
(129.10) with B given by (129.11) are 
a oB oB 
Tt oik -7;-;~.- = 0 • 
a oB oB 
lie oyk - oyk = 0 • (129.12) 
where g is held constant; equivalently, 
(129.13) 
From (129.13) 2 it follows that if we take a as the acceleration of a given motion, then the 
variational principle (129.10) yields in the 6-dimensional (x, y) space trajectories whose 
projections onto the;,: space are the paths of the particles in the given motion. The vector y 
has no obvious physical significance; its presence makes for some awkwardness, as will 
appear. 
DEDECKER 3 has used BATEMAN's principle to study the diffusion of vorticity. If we 
write (u, v) for the 6-dimensional velocity and ;;(' for a curve which is material under the 
6-dimensional motion, PorNCARE's theorem asserts that 
(129.14) 
Since both the six-dimensional and the three-dimensional motions are uniquely determined 
by the initial values of the corresponding velocities at a given point, by choosing u (;,:, y, t1 ) = 
:i:(;~:, t1) we obtainu(x, y, t) = :i:(;~:, t). We choose also v(;,:, y, t1 ) = :i:(y,t1), but this does not 
have any obvious consequence when t * t1 • At t = t1 , however, if :Jf' lies in the hyperplane 
;,: = y, it follows that d~k /JC = ~ /JC = d~k /w, where <(! is the projection of ;;(' onto x-space. 
Hence, at t = t1 , 
(129.15) 
where the last equality follows from (129.14). Both the right-hand and the left-hand member 
of (129.15) can be calculated from (129.13); by each calculation, as would be expected, the 
result is (129.2). That no new formulae emerge from use of this deeper approach is not surprising. Its interest lies in showing that diflusion of vorticity may be regarded as resulting 
from projection onto a three-dimensional space of a six-dimensional circulation preserving 
motion. Indeed, it is always possible to render a dissipative process conservative by adjoining extra quantities- be they extra dimensions or only simple absorbers-which drain off 
the excesses and supply the defects of the original process. Little illumination results from 
such extensions, since it is the dissipative process itself that commands our interest (cf. 
Sect. 6). 
1 Cf. the expositians of CARTAN [1922, 2, §§ 20-25] and DEDECKER [1951, 3, §§ 9-11], 
who derive the theorems of HELMHOLTZ and KELVIN on this basis. 
2 [1931, 2]. We modify slightly the application given by DEDECKER [1951, 3, § 21]. 
3 [1951, 3, §§ 20-22]. In [1951, 4] DEDECKER considers circulations about arbitrary 
circuits in space-time. 
Sect. 130. The Euler-Ertel theorem. 413 
130. The Euler-Ertel theorem. In the circulation preserving case, BELTRAMI's 
equation (101.7) reduces to the D'Alembert-Euler vorticity equationl, three 
equivalent forms of which are 
/w =Jw·gradp, wdv = wdv ·gradp, w =W·gradp-wdivp. (130.1) 
The second of these shows that w dv, the vorticity carried by an element of 
volume, is transportedas an absolute vector [cf. Eq. (f34.1h]. 
ERTEL 2 has introduced an arbitrary quantity into (101.7): 
Jw·gTadW -Jw·gradw =Jw*·grad'l!, (130.2) 
a result which follows easily from {101.7) and (72.8). Substitution of various 
quantities for 'l! yields various different vorticity theorems, (101.7) itself being 
the case 'l! =p. If 'l! is a scalar such that W = 0, we obtain the generalized 
Euler-Ertel conservation theorem 3 : I f it is possible to find a substantially 
constant function 'l! such that 
w* · grad 'l! = 0, (130.3) 
then 
]w · grad'l! = const for each particle; (130.4) 
equivalently, 
]w ~~ = const for each particle, ( 130.5) 
where dfdw denotes the directional derivative along the vortex line. 
By the d'Alembert-Euler condition (108.1), in a circulation preserving motion 
the requirement (130.3) is satisfied by all functions 'l!, while in a motion which 
is not circulation preserving, for a scalar function 'l! it states that w* shall be 
tangent to the surfaces 'l! = const. 
For any 'l!, in a circulation preserving motion we have from (130.2) simply 
J w · grad 'l! = J w · grad W. ( 130.6) 
We may call this result the Ertel commutation jormula, since it shows that 
djdt commutes with ] w · grad for circulation preserving motions. 
Conversely, the Ertel formula (130.6) leads to various characterizations of 
convection. For (130.6) to hold for general 'l! is obviously sufficient to ensure 
w* =0, since (130.1) is then included as a special case. But we may restriet 'l! 
considerably, since for any given 'l! (130.6) is equivalent to 
w* · grad 'l! = 0. (130.7) 
Thence to conclude that w* = 0, all we need is to be able to select at each point 
scalars W having gradients parallel to three linearly independent directions. Thus 
1 The analysis of D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, § 48] is restricted to special classes of motions 
EuLER derived (130.1) in [1761, 2, §59]. Though weil known in the eighteenth century, it 
was forgotten and was rediscovered in the next by ProLA, STOKES, and HELMHOLTZ, usually 
being named after the last. 
DELVAL [1950, 6, § 5] has attempted to formulate ( 130.1) as a principle of least compulsion 
(cf. Sect. 237); hisanalysiswas modified by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 941]. Another variational 
principle was proposed by MoREAU [1952, 13, § 7c]. 2 The original work of ERTEL [1942, 4-7] was restricted to special cases. (130.2) was 
derived by TRUESDELL [1951, 33]; a slightly different form, by ERTEL [1955, 7]. 
a The analysis of EuLER [1757. 3, §55] was put into modern notation by TRUESDELL 
[1954, 25, Part XIII]. Both EuLER and ERTEL considered only the circulation preserving 
case, in which ( 130.3) is satisfied for all 'l!. 
414 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 131. 
it follows 1 that if there exists a class C of scalars B suchthat for each of three linearly 
independent directions e 1 , e2 , e3 at each point the gradient of some one B is parallel 
to e 1 , another to ez, and a third to e3 , such that for alt BE C ERTEL' s eqution holds: 
Jw·gradB=Jw·gradB, {130.8) 
then the motion is circulat~on preserving, and (130.6) holds for all'P. If B = const 
is a vortex surface, ( 130.8) implies that B = const is also ~ vortex surface. If 
B =const is a material surface, (130.8) asserts that ]w · gradB =0 for all t; 
thus if J w · grad B vanishes at t = 0, it vanishes for all t, so we have a new proof 
of the second theorem of HELMHOLTZ (Sects. 108, 128). 
An interesting special case oftheErtel theorem {130.6) is obtained by choosing 
'P-E, where t 
E- J (tP2 - V*) dt, (130.9) 0 
where the integration is to be carried out for a fixed particle X. Then the Ertel 
theorem yields 
] w · gradE = .T w · grad (t p2 - V*). (130.10) 
By this result and {130.1) we have 
] w · ('p- gradE)=] w · [grad p · p+ p- grad (tP2 - V*)]= 0. {130.11) 
Integrating this equation from 0 to t yields the convection theorem of 
Ertel and Rossby 2 : 
]w · (p --gradE)= w. P, (130.12) 
where P stands for the initial value of p, in accord with the conventions of Sect.66. 
An elegant vorticity theorem of the same type as (130.2) but expressed in 
terms of surface integrals was noted more recently by ERTEL 3 : 
a~ Jaa-w'P- Jaa-ww = Jaa-w*'P. (130.13) 
9' 9' 9' 
In the circulation preserving case this becomes a commutation formula for flux 
integrals; the case when W = 0 shows that to multiply w by a substantially 
constant function 'P yields a quantity whose rate of diffusion is w*'P. Derivation 
of {130.13) is easy, either from (80.3) or by integrating {130.2). 
13,. Diffusion in mean. There are very broad circumstances in which there 
is no average diffusion of vorticity. By this we mean that the average values of 
certain rates of change in regions of certain types can be calculated from the 
veloci~y field alone, independently of the diffusion vector w*. These averages, then, 
have the same value in any motion of the type considered, whether circulation preserving or not. 
First, noting that 
w* · grad'P = div (p X grad 'P), (131.1) 
1 TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 98]. However, some conclusions drawn from this result by 
TRUESDELL arenot justified. 
2 [1949. 7 and 8]. 3 [1955. 8]. 
Sect. 131. Diffusion in.mean. 415 
we may integrate (130.2) over a volume and obtain1 
J [] w · ~rad "V/]- w · grad IV J dv = p da · (p X grad "V), ) • 6 
= p (da X p) · grad "V. 6 
(131.2) 
By formulating conditions sufficient for the vanishing of the surface integral 
we conclude that in a region such that on alt finite boundaries p1 =0, while in 
any part extending to infinity (p X grad "V) n = o (p-2), then the Ertel commutation 
formula (130.6) holds in mean over the whole motion: 
J [] w · grad "V/]- w · grad W] dv = 0, (131.3) 
• 
or 
d~ J w · grad'f dv = J w · grad li!dv. 
"f'" .. 
In particular, the result holds for any motion of a material confined within finite 
walls to which it adheres. In this sense, then, we may say that in the type of 
volume specified by the conditions, there is no mean diffusion of vorticity2• In 
the conditions stated, it is clear from ( 131.1) that in the conditions sufficient for 
the va.ii.dity of (131.3) the true acceleration p may be replaced by the diffusive 
acceleration p* in accord with (124.2) 
We now calculate the rate of change of the moments of vorticity ScK>• defined 
by (118.1)t. Fora material volume "Y we have from (80.3) 
$(K) =~(da· [W {p(Klp} + Wp(K+t)+ Wp(K-llldiv p]} 
9' - [gradp·da]. wp<K+t>). (131.4) 
Upon substituting for w from BELTRAMI's formula (101.7) 3, we find that by a 
happy circumstance two of the terms so introduced cancel the last two terms in 
(131.4), which becomes simply 
tm(KJ =~da· 'W {p(Klp} +~da· W* p(K+t). (131.5) 
9' 9' 
By (App. 26.1h and the fact that divw* =0 follows 
tm(K) = ~da · 'W {p(K) P} + J {p(K) W*} dv. 
9' "f'" 
Now by the transport theorem (81.3) we have 
m(K)= ~tl_ +~da· p {p(Klw}. 
9' 
From (App. 26.1)1 we get the identities 
0 ~ {;:.::[(~;~~~;)~'· l 
= ~ ~ {p<K> (daxp)} +~da· w* p<K>. 
9' 9' 
1 TRUESDELL [1951, 34]. 
2 The special case "V = p was observed by TRUESDELL [ 1948, 34]. 
(131.6) 
(131.7) 
( 131.8) 
416 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 132. 
By combining this result and (131.5) with (131.7) we finally obtain1 
~~!K_l =~da. [w {p<K>p}- p{p<K>w}] + ~{p<K+I>(daxp)}. (131.9) 
~ ~ 
The vorticity moment theorem of Sect. 118 states conditions sufficient that 
tle<o>• tm(I)• ... , 'lB<x> shall vanish. From (131.9) we may infer weaker conditions 
sufficient that these moments remain constant in time: Subiect to tke boundary 
condition 
Wn=O, Pt=O 
wpn = o(p-K-2), 
or } Pt =o(p-x-a), (131.10) 
tke first K + 1 moments of vorticity are constant in time. In the case when all 
finite boundaries are stationary and the material adheres without slipping, 
we have Pt =0 and w" =0, so that~the only conditions of the theorem which 
remain to be considered are the order conditions at infinity. In the conditions 
as stated, it is clear from (131.6) and (131.8) that the true acceleration p may 
be replaced by the diffusive acceleration p*, in accord with (124.2). 
132. The generalized convection vector. Complex-screw motions. The properties of motions in which vorticity is transported by convection only. are 
relatively simple and easy to picture. Kinematical analysis of more general 
motions usually seeks conditions such that some of the properties of circulation 
preserving motions can be carried over or adjusted to more complicated circumstances. The theorems of mean value in the previous section are examples. 
Another example is the following theorem of APPELL2, which we state without 
proof: Given any family oflines, furnisked witk continuously turning tangents, 
wkick in a given motion p are materiallines, tkere exists a continuously dilferentiable field v wkose circulation about any material circuit is constant and wkose 
vortex lines are tke given materiallines. 
We now construct apparatus for a more fruitful generalization. The underlying idea 3 consists in introducing a dass of vector fields proportional to the 
velocity: 
vc=-P, Vo 
where v0 is any non-vanishing substantially constant scalar: 
V0 = 0, V0 =l= 0. 
(132.1) 
(132.2) 
Any such field ''c weshall call a generaUzed convection vector, and v0 weshall call 
the defining parameter. We introduce also the curl of the convection vector: 
Wc= cnrlvc. (132-3) 
Then we have identically 
w = curl v0 Vc = v0 wc+ grad v0 X Vc, (132.4) 
1 The special case K = 0 was derived by TRUESDELL [ 1948, 32], generalizing an earlier 
analysis of ]AFFE [1921, 3]. The general formula was given by TRUESDELL [1951, 28, § 12]. 
Cf. also HowARD [1957. 8, §V]. 
2 The analysis of APPELL is in the material description [1899, 1, §§ 1-10]; a shorter 
spatial proof was given by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 89]. Another proof is given by DROBOT 
and RYBARSKI [1959, 4, § III.4]. 3 Due to HICKS, GUENTHER and WASSERMAN [1947, 6, lntrod.] and extended by TRUESDELL [1951, 32] [1952, 23,' § 8]. A different class of convection vectors was considered by 
HICKS [1949, 14]. The definition (132,1) is motivated by work of CRocco [1936, 3], although 
he considered only the trivial case when v0=const; also the introduction of m in (133.1) is 
suggested by certain special results of CRocco. 
Sect. 132. The generalized convection vector. Complex-screw motions. 417 
and hence quite independently of the condition (132.2) we obtain 
2 • v0 Vc · Wc = p · w. (132.5) 
By (App. 33-5) it follows that the generalized convection vector is complex-lamellar 
if and only if the motion is complex-lamellar. 
The researches of NEMENYI and PRIM1 have drawn attention to motions in 
which 
VcXWc = 0, (132.6) 
the possibility Wc = 0 not being excluded. The special case v0 = 1 is an irrotational 
or screw motion, and the class of motions satisfying the gen~ralization (132.6) 
will be called complex-screw motions. The remainder of this section presents 
results equivalent to those of NEMENYI and PRIM concerning this interesting 
type of motion. 
We first establish the connection between complex-screw motions and irrotational or ordinary screw motions. By (132.4) and (132.2)1 we obtain 
• 2 · . o log v0 pxw = v0VcXWc + p2 gradlogv0 + p-8
- 1
-. (132.7) 
From this identity it is obvious that a complex-screw motion in which the defining 
parameter is either uniform or steady is an irrotational or screw motion if and only 
if the defining parameter is both uniform and steady. This result implies broadly 
that the class of complex-screw motions is more extensive than that of irrotational and screw motions. We may calculate the angle 1p between the vortex 
line and the stream line in the following way 2• If Wc X Vc = 0, the two summands 
on the right-hand side of (132.4) are perpendicular, so that 
=v~w~+(gradlogv xp) , l = v~ w~ + (grad log v0) 2 :p- (p · gradlog v0) 2 , 
=V~ W~ + (grad log v0)2 p2- ( o!~~Vo r. 
Simultaneously (132.7) becomes 
. . 2 d 1 . o log Vo p X w = p gra og v0 + p - 0
- 1
-; 
in view of (132.2)1 , the square of this equation is 
(p X w) 2 = p2 [ p2 (grad log v0) 2 ~ ( 0 ~~~Von. 
The angle 1p is then obtained by combining (132.8) and (132.10): 
CSC'IjJ = \/XWW\ = (1 + • v5w~ ( o!o V r) p2(grad log v0)2 - f, 
whence follows 
( 132.8) 
(132.9) 
(132.10) 
(132.11) 
(132.12) 
By comparing (132.9) with (122.4) we conclude that in a complex-screw motion 
whose defining Parameter is steady but not uniform, the surfaces upon which that 
parameter is constant are Lamb surfaces. 
1 [1948, 17, § 5] [1949. 21 and 25] [1952, 16, Chap. V, Sect. C]. 
2 We follow and correct the analysis of TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 90]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 27 
418 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 133-
By putting (132-9) into LAGRANGE's acceleration formula (99.14) we obtain 
•• op • d . ologvo d 1 • ) p = af - p2 gra log Vo - p -o-t - + gra 2p2' 
ovc 2 d 1 2 =v0Tt + v0 gra 2 vc. 
(132.13) 
Hence in a complex-screw motion whose convection vector is steady the acceleration 
is complex-lamellar, its normal surfaces being the surfaces of constant magnitude 
of the convection vector. 
Taking the curl of (132.13) yields 
1 .. d ovc owc + 1 d 2 d 2 cur p = gra v0 X Te + v0 ----at 2 gra v0 X gra vc . (132.14) 
On the assumption that the local time derivatives are zero, we now consider in 
turn the situations that annul the remaining term on the right. First, if v0 is 
uniform, then from Wc X Vc = 0 it follows that w X p = 0. Second, we may have 
v~ = const. Third, if the surfaces v0 = const coincide with the surfaces vc = 
const, these in turn are surfaces of constant speed. In summary of these results 
we state that a complex-screw motion whose convection vector is steady is a circulation preserving motion if and only if 
a) it is an irrotational or screw motion, or 
b) its convection vector is of uniform magnitude, or 
c) at each fixed time, the defining Parameter is a function of the speed alone. 
When the motion itself is steady, we may apply the theorems stated just 
before and just after (132.13) to replace c) by 
c') the surfaces of constant speed are Lamb surfaces, and the acceleration is 
normal to them. 
Although, as indicated by these results, complex-screw motions usually fail 
to be circulation preserving, yet in some types of such motions the mechanism 
of diffusion operates in a fashion closely analogous to convection, as will be 
shown now. 
133. Generalized convection theorems. Consider first a steady complexscrew motion, and let m be any solution of 
div (mvc) =0. (133-1) 
Noting that vector sheets of Vc are stream surfaces, we apply the theorem of 
GROMEKA and BELTRAMI derived in Sect. App. 34 and obtain the convection 
theof'em jOf' steady comple:x:-scf'ew motions: The surfaces 
wc = const (133.2) mvc 
are stream surfaces; in particular, (133.2) holds on each stream line. The analogy 
to convection is immediate, and the result generalizes the second GromekaBeltrami theorem (112.4). 
The corresponding generalized convection theorem for complex-lamellar 
motions lies deeper1• For any function F we readily obtain the identity 
curl [F (~ Vo 
ovc 
Ot 
+ Wc X vc)] = grad _!_ 
Vo 
X -~~c ot - wc 
Vo 
8F 
Ot 
+ ~ Vo 
oF 
ot 
wc + l 
+vc· gradFwc -Fwc · gradvc+Fwcdivvc- vcdiv(Fwc). 
(133-3) 
1 TRUESDELL [1951, 32]. 
Sect. 133. Generalized convection theorems. 419 
Now let F be chosen as a solution of 
grad !'___ X ovc = "Wc ~!"- v0 ot v0 ot ' (133.4) 
and let Mlfv. be any permissible density for Vc, i.e., let M be any solution of 
or equivalently 
1-'- . -logM =- dlVVc, Vo 
: 0 ~ + div (M Vc) = 0. 
Our identity (133.3) then reduces to 
~ curl [F ( :0 o:ec + WcXvc)] I 
_ 1 d (Fwc) Fwc d vc d' (F ) - v;;- {[[ ---xr- - ---xr- · gra Vc - M 1v Wc , 
(133-5) 
(133.6) 
( 13 3 .7) 
a generalization of BELTRAMI's diffusion equation (101.7}, to which it reduces 
when v0 =1, F=1, M =J-1. 
We now form the scalar product of (133-7) with FwcfM, thus obtaining a 
generalization of (101.8}: 
_1_ 2v0 
!___ dt (Fwc)2 M M = Fwc. grad Vc. Fwc M + _!__Vc. M2 Wc Wc. gradF + I 
Ftv [ ( 1 ov )] (133.8) + M 2c · curl F v;;- 8tc;_ + WcXVc . 
By (132.5), the assumption that the motion is complex-lamellar, now employed 
for the first time, annuls the second term on the right in (133.8). Let us assume 
further that the third term is zero: 
Wc · curl [F ( :0 ~c + WcXvc)] = 0. (133.9) 
We then obtain the equation 
_1_ !___ ( F wc )2 = F wc . grad Vc . F wc . 2v0 dt M M M (133.10) 
We now impose the further requirement that the vortex lines be steady. 
Then it is possible to choose stationary co-ordinates at a single pointl in such 
a way that the x1 co-ordinate curve is tangent to the vortex line at the point 
in question: 
ds2 = h2 (dx1)2 + g22 (dx2)2 + gaa (dx3)2, ) 
oh (w)2 = w1 w1 , .i1 = 0, Tt = 0. 
From (133.10) we have then 
1 d I F Wc - 1 - ovl:_ { 1 } k 
·;;;;- dt og ---xr- - Vc, 1 - o xt + 1 k Vc' 
(133.11) 
(133.12) 
1 The neighboring xl co-ordinate curves need not be vortex lines. Thus (133.11} does not 
impose any restriction on the class of motions considered. 
27* 
420 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 133. 
whence follows, since v~= 0, 
~ lo F wc = { 1 } i2 + { 1 } .xa dt g M 1 2 1 3 ' 
- ologk "2 + ologk "3 - ~x ----axsx, 
= 0 log k i1 + 0 log k x2 + 0 log k _i3 + 0 log k 
ox1 ox2 ox3 ot , 
(133-13) 
Hence 
d (Fwc) dt kM = O. (133-14) 
The equation just derived expresses a simple conservation law. Going back 
and collecting the assumptions we have made to derive it, we obtain the generalized vorticity convection theorem for comple;r-lamellar motions: 
Given a complex-lamellar motion with steady vortex lines, let the x1 Co-ordinate 
curve at the point in question be tangent to the vortex line and let dx1jd s = h-1 ; let 
v0 be any substantially constant function, let Vc and Wc be defined by 
let F be any solution of 
Vc = k, Wc- curl vc; 
Vo 
F ovc wc oF grad-X--=--· Vo Ot v0 ot ' 
and let M be any solution of 
__!___ ~ + div (M vc) = o; v0 ut 
(133-1), (133-3) 
(133.4) 
(133.6) 
if further, it is possible to find among the functions v0 and F satisfying these conditions 
a pair such that also 
(133-9) 
then 
Fwc 
kM = const (133-15) 
for each particle. Of the conditions of this theorem only the requirement of complex-lamellar motion with steady vortex lines and the one Eq. (133-9) are truly 
restrictive, the others being rather in the nature of definitions of the dass of 
admissible functions v0 , F, and M. 
For the simplest special case, put v0 = 1, F = 1. Then Vc = p, and we may 
satisfy the condition (133.6) by the choice M = J-1• By (107.2) the condition 
(133-9) reduces to 
W ·W* =0. (133-16) 
Hence it follows from the theorem above that in a complex-lamellar motion with 
steady vortex lines, in order that 
]kw = const (133-17) 
for each particle it is necessary and sufficient that the motion be circulation preserving or that the diffusion Vßcfßl': be normal to the vorticity. In particular the theorem 
applies both to plane motions and to· rotationally symmetric motions. For the 
Sect. 134. Characterizations of convection, I. CAUCHY's formula. 421 
former, we take h = 1 and obtain D'Alembert's vorticity theorem 1 : In order 
that a plane motion be circulation preserving it is necessary and sutficient that 
]w = const ( 13 3.18) 
for each f!a1'ticle. For rotationally symmetric motion, we have h =r, where r 
is the distance from the axis of symmetry. Hence follows Svanberg's vorticity 
theorem 2 : In order that a rotationally symmetric motion be circulation preserving, 
it is necessary and sufficient that 
_lrJJ_ = const r (133.19) 
for each particle. 
It was these theorems, stating that J w or J wjr is carried by the motion as 
if it were some native property of the particles, that originally motivated the 
name "convection" for the process of transfer of vorticity in a circulation preserving motion. 
Special cases of ( 133.15) appropriate to certain gas motions which are not circulation 
preserving have been deve!Dped by TRUESDELL 3. 
134. Characterizations of convection, I. CAUcHY's formula. The most useful 
characterization of convection, the celebrated Cauchy vorticity jormula4, 
follows at once from (101.9) or (101.11): 
(134.1) 
(134.1) 1 is the tensor law of transformation for the covariant components of spin, 
when the motion is regarded as change of co-ordinates. That is, in order for the 
motion to be circulation preserving it is necessary and sufficient that vorticity be 
convected. The main consequences of (134.1) have already been given in generalized form in Sect. 129. Here we add only the corollary that w =0 if and only 
if W = 0. This is the famous velocity potential theorem of LAGRANGE and 
CAUCHY 5 : In a circulation preserving motion, a particle once in irrotational motion 
is always in irrotational motion. Thus a portion of material for which a velocity 
potential exists moves about and carries this property with it, but the part of 
space which it originally occupied may in the course of time come to be occupied 
by material which did not originally possess the property, and which therefore 
cannot have acquired it. This theorem may be proved in several other ways. 
We leave it to the reader to see how proofs may be constructed from the results 
given in Sect. 108, Sect. 130, and the two sections to follow. 
1 D'ALEMBERT [1761, 1, §XIII] treated only steady isochoric motion. Cf. also STOKES 
[1842, 4, Eq. (10)], HELMHOLTZ [1858, 1, § 5], LAMB [1878, 5]. Sufficiency is not proved 
by these authors. 2 [1841, 5, § 4]. Cf. STOKES [1842, 4, Eq. (21)], HELMHOLTZ [1858, 1, § 6], LAMB 
[ 1878, 5]. Sufficiency is not proved by these authors. 
3 [1952, 23, §§ 9-10 [1954, 24, § 92]. This work was motivated by earlier results of 
CROCCO [1936, 3] and PRIM [1948, 21] [1952, 16, Eqs. (65), (194)]. 4 [1827, 5, 1e partie, Sect. 1, ~ 4]. CAUCHY's analysis is elaborate and does not make 
evident that (134.1) 2 is sufficient as well as necessary. Cf. CRUDELI [1918, 1, §I]. That the 
form ( 134.1)1 is a necessary and sufficient condition for circulation preserving motion in ndimensional spaces was observed by DE DoNDER [1912, 2, § 5]. 
5 The statement and proof of LAGRANGE [1783, 1, §§ 17 -19] [1788, 1, Part II, § 11, ~ 16 
- 17] are faulty. They were corrected by CAUCHY, loc. cit. An extensive Iiterature presents 
the proofs, misunderstandings, and controversies that have arisen in this connection: PoissoN 
[1831, 2, ~ 73] [1833, 4, § 654], PowER [1842, 3], STOKES [1845, 4, §§ 10-13] [1846, 1, §I] 
[1848, 3], ST. VENANT [1869, 6], BRESSE [1880, 3 and 4], BouSSINESQ [1880, 1 and 2], PolNeARE [1893. 6, § 152], HADAMARD [1901, 8, ~ 4, footnote]. Critical reviews are given by 
DuHEM [1901, 7, Part 5] and TRUESDELL [1954, 24, §§ 104-107]. 
422 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The C!assica! Field Theories. Sect. 135, 
135. Characterizatioils of convection, II. The transformation of WEBER. 
CAUCHY's formula (134.1) is a first integral of the kinematical equations. We 
now seek a corresponding statement in terms of the velocity field itself. For any 
motion we have 
(135.1) 
From (109.1) follows 
(135.2) 
By combining (135.1) and (135.2) we get 
xk i = (1. i 2 - V*) . ,et k 2 ,Ct (135.3) 
Iotetration along the path of a particle then yields 
t I (1 • 2 V*) d k • • 2x - ·"' t=x,C<xk-x"'. (135.4) 0 
where x"' stands for the initial value of xk in accord with the convention (66.8). 
If we introduce the function E defined by (130.9), this last result may be written 
E,"'=x~"'ik-x"'. (135.5) 
which is Weber's transjormation 1• It expresses the condition for circulation 
preserving motion in an integrated material form. It asserts that the actual 
velocity ~ exceeds the mere transport of the initial velocity X by the gradient 
of E, where Eis the accumulated difference of the specific kinetic energy and the 
acceleration potential along the path traversed. 
For the case of steady motion, an ingenious modification of WEBER's transformation has been constructed by ERTEL2• Instead of (130.9) write 
t 
E(t,t') =I (ii2- V*) dt, (135.6) 
t' 
where t' may vary arbitrarily from one particle to another: t' =t'(X). Denote 
by primes functions evaluated at time t'. In particular, write 
x'=x(X,t'(X)) (135.7) 
for the place occupied by the particle X at time t', and write ~· for its velocity. 
Differentiating ( 13 5. 7) yields 
whence 
x' k = (xk ) ' + i' k t' ,Ct ,Ct ,etJ (135.8} 
But 
x'k i' = (xk i )' +i'2t' . ,et k ,cx k ,a; (135.9) 
t 
E,C< =I (ii2- V*),C<dt- (ii2- V*)' t:"'' ) t' 
= I 1
(1.i2- V*) dt- (1.i2 +V*) (t- t') - i' 2t' 2 ,IX 2 ,cx 1 CXJ 
t' 
(135.10} 
where we have used the fact that in steady motion i i 2 +V* is constant on each 
stream line (Sect. 125). Hence by (135.9) follows 
t 
E,"' =I (i i 2 - V*),"'dt- (ii2 +V*) (t- t'),"'- x',k"'i~ + (x~"'ik)'. (135.11) 
t' 
1 [1868, 17, § 2]. The proof given hereisthat of APPELL [1897, 1, § 7]. 2 [1952, 4]. 
Sect. 135. Characterizations of convection, II. The transformation of WEBER. 423 
Integrating {135-3) from t' tot yields 
f 
.r (i x2 - V*),a;dt = X~a;Xk- (x~a;xk)'' t' 
whence by {135.11) follows 
E - k • (1 "2 + V*) ( ') ( I k "') ,a-X,a;Xk- 2X t-t ,a;- X,a;Xk, 
generalizing {135.5). Multiplying this result by X~k yields finally 
xk = E,k + (ii2 +V*) (t- t'),k + x~,mx'm. 
{135.12) 
(135.13) 
{135.14) 
The next step is to formulate conditions sufficient that the last term shall 
vanish. First, am x~,m = 0 for some non-vanishing a if and only if x~,m is singular. 
This is the case for all X if and only if all the places .:r'(X) lie upon a certain surface; that is, if and only if t'(X) is suchthat the particle X crosses that surface 
at the timet' (X). If it is possible to choose t'(X) in this way, then weshall have 
x 'm x k, m = 0 if and only if i:' is normal to the surface. Summarizing these results, 
we obtain Ertel's potential theorem: In a steady circulation preserving 
motion such that every stream line is normal to a certain surface, let t-t' be the 
time which the particle now at .:r has travelled since crossing that surface. Then a 
set of M onge potentials for the velocity is 1 
t 
H=E=J(!x2 -V*)dt, F=!x2 +V*, G=t-t'. {135.15) 
t' 
Put 
S = E + (!x2 +V*) (t- t'). {135.16) 
Then evidently when {135.15) is valid we have the alternative set 
H = S, F = t' - t, G = t x2 + V*. ( 13 5 .17) 
Now by {135.6) and the fact that !x2 +V* is constant in time for each particle 
we see that t 7< 7< 
S = J x2 dt = J dxmxm = J dxpiJ, {135.18) r o o 
where x is the arc length along the stream line, measured from its point of intersection with the normal surface. The right-hand side of (135.18) is simply the 
flow along the stream line (Sect. 129). Then the Monge resolution asserted by 
{135.17) is equivalent to 
xk = (f dxmxm) - (t- t') (!x2 + V*),k· {135.19) 0 ,k 
These Monge potentials H, F, G have simple kinematical interpretations: flow 
along the stream line, time for traversing the stream line, and specific motive 
energy of the stream line. 
N ow consider the special case when the stream lines in a certain region are 
all closed curves, of length, say, l, where l varies in general from one to another. 
Since the motion is steady, the time required for a particle to traverse each stream 
line once is the same for all particles upon the stream line, and may be called its 
period, T. If we replace x by x + l and t by t + T, ä: must remain unchanged, 
so that by (138.19) 
z+l 
ik=(J dxmxm) -(t+T-t')(!x2 +V*),k· (135.20) 0 ,k 
1 When the stream lines possess more than one orthogonal surface, FoRTAK [1953, 10] 
has shown that the representation (135.15) is independent of the choice of surface. 
424 C. TRuESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 136. 
Subtracting (135.19) yields 
(
x+l ) 0 = I dxmxm - T(t.i2 +V*),,.. (135.21) X ,k x+l 
But I dxm Xm= pdxm Xm, the circulation around the stream line. By (135.21), X 
this quantity if not constant is a function of ! x2 +V*, and hence is constant 
on each Lamb surface (Sect. 125). Moreover, from (135.21) follows 
(135.22) 
provided that pdxm xm =f= const. We have thus obtained the elegant Ertel 
theorem on circulating motions1 : In a steady rotational circulation preserving 
motion whose stream lines are closed curves intersecting a certain surface arthogonally, the circulation of the stream lines is a function of their energy !.i2 +V* 
only. Hence it is the same for all stream lines lying upon the same Lamb surface. 
Moreover, the periods of the stream lines are given by (135.22). 
To verify ERTEL's.theorem in the case of a steady plane rotational simple vortex (Sect. 89). 
for which any azimuthal plane may be taken as the normal surface, by (89.8) and the formula 
in footnote 3, p. 408, we have 
as is evident. 
2n(2rw+r2w') 
2rw2 +r2ww' 
2n 
w , (135.23) 
136. Characterizations of convection, 111. The transformation of CLEBSCH. 
We now seek a spatial counterpart of the analysis of the last section. We consider the Monge potentials of the velocity, (99.19). In any motion we have 
(99.20), and the surfaces F = const, G = const are vortex surfaces. Since in a 
circulation preserving motion the second Helmholtz theorem asserts that the 
vortex lines are material, it is natural to conjecture, and weshall now accordingly 
prove, that it is possible to choose the functions F and G in such a way that the 
surfaces F = const, G = const are also material surfaces, that is, in such a way 
that 
(136.1) 
Let FO (X) and G0 (X) be any pair of continuously differentiahte functions satisfying (99.20) at t = 0. First, as was stated in Sect. App. 32, for one of the functions, 
say G, in (99.20) at time t we may select any function such that the surfaces 
G = const are vortex surfaces, and thus a permissible choice is given by 
G (:.r, t) = G0 (X (:.r, t))' (136.2) 
whereby (136.1) 2 is satisfied. By (App.32.4), the two functions po andF satisfy 
the relations 
po=JW«pE«dXfJ F=Jwkmelldxm (136.3) 
EYG?y ' efJ G,p ' 
where E and e are arbitrary continuous fields, which we may select independently 
and at pleasure, subject only to the restriction that the denominators in (136.3) 
be non-vanishing in the regions considered, and in each integral the path of 
integration is the same, viz., any curve lying wholly upon one of the surfaces 
G=G0 =const. By employing CAUCHY's vorticity formula (134.1) and (20.2) 
1 [1950, 7]. Our proof is taken from [1952, 4, §V]. 
Sect. 136. Characterizations of convection, III. The transformation of CLEBSCH. 425 
we obtain 
W"pX~k ePG 
X~m Xy 
l dxm 
' 
l ,y ,p 
(X~k l) WIXß dXß 
(x; p eP) ;;:;-
(136.4) 
Hence if we make the choice E" X~k ek, then comparison of (136.3h with (136-Jh 
yields 
F(~, t) = FO(X), (136.5) 
so that ( 136.1 )1 also is satisfied. The possibility of such a choice of the functions F 
and G was first proved by CLEBSCH1 in a different way. 
With the aid of (136.1) we are able to reduce DUHEM's acceleration formula 
(99.24): 
Xk- .. -(1 .2+ oH +FoG) -X - - . 2 at at ,k (136.6) 
If we absorb into H a function of time only, whose value, by (99.19), cannot 
affect the velocity, comparison of (136.6) with (109.1) yields 
V* + ~. _i2 + a H + F oG = 0 
2 at at · (136.7) 
This result may be called Clebsch 's transformation 2• It expresses the condition 
for circulation preserving motion in integrated form and wholly in terms of the 
spatial variables. According to the definition of Sect. 120, CLEBSCH's transformation is a Bernoullian theorem, but unlike other results of this type it is not limited 
in its validity to motions with steady vorticity. 
Another form of CLEBSCH's transformation may be obtained by noticing that 
from (136.1) 2 and (99.19) we have 
~~ =-p · gradG =-[gradH +FgradGJ · gradG, (136.8) 
while by squaring (99.19) follows 
i/>2 = t (gradH) 2 + F grad G. grad H + iF2 (grad G)2. (136.9) 
Putting these two results into (136.7) yields 3 
aH 1 1 V*+ Tt + 2 (grad H) 2 - 2 P (grad G)2 = 0. (136.10) 
A part of the apparent simplicity of CLEBSCH's transformation is illusory, 
since in steady motion the functions H and G generally cannot be steady. In 
fact, comparison of (136.6) with LAGRANGE's acceleration formula (99.14) in the 
case of steady motion yields 
wxp . [ oH oG l = grad 8t +F Tt . (136.11) 
1 [1859. 1, § 3]. Other proofs were given by HANKEL [1861, 1, §VI], HILL [1881, 3, 
§ III and pp. 168-210], BASSET [1888, 1, §§ 33-35]. LAMB [1906, 4, § 166], APPELL 
[1921, 1, § 799], and TRUESDELL [1954. 24, § 101]. The last of these is the one reproduced here. 2 CLEBSCH [1857. 1, § 5] derived an equivalent formula from the equations for perfect 
fluids. See also BELTRAMI [1871, 1, § 13], HILL [1881, 3, § IIIJ. 
3 This formula, suggested by similar but generally false equations of CHALLIS [1842, 1] 
and CRAIG [1881, 2, p. 12), was derived by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 101]. 
426 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 136. 
Hence H and G can be steady if and only if the motion is an irrotational or 
screw motion, in which case CLEBSCH's transformation (136.7) reduces to the same 
form1 as does the spatial Bernoulli theorem (120.1). 
Finally we consider the more general case in which the functions F and G 
arenot subjected to (136.1). By taking the curl of DuHEM's acceleration formula 
(99.24) and comparing the result with the d'Alembert-Euler condition (108.1), 
we then obtain 
grad F X grad G = grad G X grad F (136.12) 
as a necessary and sufficient condition to be satisfied by the Monge potentials 
of the velocity in order that the motion be circulation preserving. That is, the 
vectors gradG, gradF, gradG, and gradF must alllie in the plane perpendicular 
to the vorticity w, and the area inclosed by the parallelogram whose edges are 
gradG and gradF must equal the area enclosed by that whose edges are gradF 
and gradG. 
Without direct use of the foregoing, we introduce the abbreviation 
W=V*+__!_p"2 + 8H +F~ (136.13) 2 at ot ' 
form grad W, and simplify the result with the aid of (99.24) and (109.1) so as to 
obtain2 
Hence 
grad W = G gradF- F grad G. 
a~rF,~) =grad w. gradFxgradG =O. 
x,y,z 
(136.14) 
(136.15) 
Since F and Gare necessarily independent, from this result follows the equation 
of DuHEM3 : 
W = W(F, G, t). (136.16) 
Hence 
aw aw grad W = oF gradF+aGgradG. (136.17) 
Comparison with (136.14) now yields the Hamiltonian equations of STUART 
and LAMB4 : 
aw · ifF = G, aw · ac;=-F. (136.18) 
Given the acceleration potential V* of a circulation preserving motion, that 
F, G, W, H satisfy (136.12), (136.13), (136.16), and (136.18) is plainly not sufficient 
for F, G, H to be Monge potentials of any given velocity field, since His indeterminate up to an arbitrary steady function. The contribution of any Hin (99.19), 
however, is only an irrotational motion. Thus a solution F, G, W, H always 
yields a circulation preserving motion. CLEBSCH's transformation (136.7) results 
from use of the particular solution W = 0. 
1 This same result follows also from the fact that the surfaces G = const are material 
vortex surfaces, and hence in a steady motion in order to be themselves steady they must be 
Lamb surfaces. 
2 DUHEM [1901, 4, § 2]. 3 [1901, 4, § 3]. 
' The result was first published by LAMB [ 1906, 4, § 166]; later [ 1924, 9, § 167] he attributeditto STUART. DuHEM [1901, 4, §§ 4-7] discussed the general theory of the integration 
of the system (136.1), (136.7) by analogy to JACOBI's method in analytical dynamics. MASUDA [1953. 17] uses the Hamilton-Jacobi theory to obtain some of the theorems given above. 
Suchgeneral methods, failing to take account of the firstintegral (134.1) or its various equivalents, lead to an elaborate and awkward treatment. 
Sects. 136A, 137. The Euler-Clebsch reduction of steady circulation preserving motion. 427 
The reader may verify that the special potentials (1)5.15) and (1)5.17) 
satisfy (1)6.12) and (1)6.18). 
Generalizations of the transformations of CLEBSCH and WEBER to arbitrary 
motions areeasy to work out but not illuminating1 . 
136A. Appendix. Variational form of CLEBSCH'S transformation. CLEBSCH2 observed 
that for the isochoric case, use of the apparatus of Sect. 136leads to a simple variational principle. The three functions H, F, and G are to be varied so as to yield, through (99.19). a 
velocity field :i; which is isochoric and circulation preserving. The formula (136.7) is taken 
as a definition of a function V*, not yet known to be an acceleration potential, in terms of 
F, G,H. Then 
-!5V*=i"!5" + 8!5H +F 8!5G + oG !5F 
. 8!5H 8!5G oG 
x,. ae at at · l = [!5H,k+ G,k !5F+F!5G,k]xk+ ---a-t+F---a-t+ Tt !5F, (1J6A.1) 
a ,. · · =[(!5H+F!5G)ik] k+ßt (!5H+F!5G)- (t5H+Ft5G) i ,.-Ft5G+Gt5F. 
Integrating over a fixed volume • yields 
-t5fdtfV*dv=f lg lg [ ~(t5H+Ft5G)ikdak ] dt+J(!5H+Ft5G) ,~. dv+ ) 
e, ,. e, ' ,. e, (136A.2) 
lz [ • • ] + f f{Gt5F-Ft5G- (t5H +Ft5G) i~,.}dv dt. 
e, ,. 
We now impose the condition that t5G and !5H vanish throughout • at t=t1 and at t=t, 
as well as vanishing on 4 at all times. Then from ( 136A.2) it follows that 
lg 
t5 J dt J V* dv = o (1J6A.J) li " 
is equivalent to the conditions i\=0, F=O, G=O in •· The first, by (77.1), is the condition of isochoric motion; the second and third show that (136.12) is satisfied and hence 
that the motion is circulation preserving. By CLEBSCH's transformation (136.7), the function 
V* satisfying (136.7) is in fact an acceleration potential. 
137. The Euler-Clebsch reduction of steady circulation preserving motion. 
After establishing a representation of the form (App. )2.5) for a solenoidal field, 
EULER 3 applied it to the velocity field of a steady motion. Writing 
p = J C (A, B) grad A x grad B, (1)7.1) 
we present EuLER's determination of conditions on A, B, C in order that the 
motion be circulation preserving. Firstwehave the identity 
wxp. da:= w · (] C gradA xgrad B) xda:, ) 
=] Cw · [(gradA ·da:) grad B- (grad B ·da:) gradAJ, (1)7.2) 
=]Cw· [dAgradB-dBgradA). 
Using (125.5) as the condition for circulation preserving motion, in the steady 
case we write it as 
- d(V* + jp2) =WXp ·da:. (1)7.3) 
1 APPELL (1917, 3, § 2] [1921, 1, § 815], CARSTOIU (1947, 2, § 2], TRUESDELL (1954, 24, 
§ 103]. 
2 [1859. 1, § 3]. Cf. also BASSET [1888, 1, § 34]. 3 [1757. 3, §§54-56]. His analysis, which was rediscovered by BASSET [1888, 1, §§ 39 
to 40] and v. MISES [1909, 8, § 4.3], was put into modern terms by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, 
§ 98]. 
428 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPJN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 137. 
Comparison of (137.2) and (137.3) yields EuLER's formulae 
o(V* + !.p2) dB } oA 2 = - ] C w · grad B = -] C w (iiJ) , 
o(V*+tfi2) oB =JC 'W . 
gra 
dA =]C w ~ dw ' 
(137.4) 
whence follows the condition of integrability 
o o M (] Cw · gradA) + 8if (] Cw · grad B) = o, (137.5) 
where w is to be thought of as expressed by w = curl (] C gradA x grad B). 
We may use this apparatus to determine conditions that the validity of (130.5) for two 
families of surfaces, 'V = A = const and B = const, be sufficient to ensure that a given velocity 
field p be circulation preserving. We assume C determined by (137.1), and we assume that 
A, B, and C satisfy (137.5). Then there exists a function F(A, B) suchthat (137.4) is satisfied 
with F replacing V*+ tp2, and hence by the identity (137.3) follows 
- gradF=wxp. 
Hence by (99.14) 
(137.6) 
(137.7) 
Therefore the motion is circulation preserving with F-tp2 as an acceleration potential. 
In summary of these results, we have EuLER's characterization of steady convection: 
In a steady motion, let it be possible to find two independent families of stream sheets A = const, 
B=const, suchthat (130.5) hold for each; with C determined by (137.1), i/ (137.5) holds also 
then it follows that the motion is circulation preserving. Conversely, in a steady circulation 
preserving motion (130.5) and (137.5) hold for any two substantially constant functions A, B. 
Taking C = 1, as is always possible, CLEBSCH found an alternative form for ( 13 7. 5) in 
the case when the co-ordinates are reetangular Cartesian. Since in any steady motion i:J1 
is a function of the six components A,k and B,k• we have 
so that 
[ o~,k ( ~ i 2f]2)J.k = Bkmn B,n im,k = - w · grad B,l 
[ o!,k ( ~ i 2
JP) ],k = w. gradA. 
Hence (137.5) may be written 
~[1-0 (_!_i 2/P)] =~[1-0 (_!_z 2/P)] . oB oA,k 2 ,k oA oB,k 2 ,k 
(137.8) 
(137-9) 
(137.10) 
In the isochoric case, the problern of determining all steady circulation preserving mQtions 
is thus reduced in principle to the solution of a single differential equation for the speed. 
These results may be used to derive a variational principle of CLEBSCHl for 
the isochoric case. Again taking C = 1, we vary A and B. Since, as established 
above, V*+ -!z2 is a function of A and B only, we have 
~ J(v*+ ~ )dv=J[o~ (V*+~ )~A+ o~ (V*+~ z2)~B]dv; (137.11) V V 
1 [1857. 1, §§ 3-4]. Our derivation follows BASSET [1888, 1, § 41]. 
Sect. 138. APPELL's theorem on the stretching of vortex lines. 429 
since z is a function of A ,k and E,k only, we have 
(137.12) 
~ ( " 1 "2 " 1 "2 ) 
= ~(JA +~(JE d - oA k aB k ak 
d ' ' 
- J [(ati2) M + (atz2) (JE] dv. 
aA,k ,k aB,k ,k 
" 
We restriet the variations so that M =0 and (JE =0 on d. Adding (137.11) to 
(137.12) then yields 
(J j (V*+ z2) dv = j {[ ~ (v* + ~ z2)- (~~.z::tJ (JA+ l 
+ [a~ (V*+~ z2)- (~~~)JbE}dv. 
(137.13) 
By the identity (137.9), it follows that if there exists a function V* such that 
(J J (V*+ z2) dv = 0 (137-14) 
" 
when A and E are varied as stated, z being given by ( 13 7.1) with J C = 1, then 
the differential system (137.4) is satisfied. Hence (137.14) is a necessary and sufficient condition that a given solenoidal field be the velocity field of a steady 
isochoric circulation preserving motion. 
138. APPELL's theorem on the Stretching of vortex lines. In any rotational 
motion, for any material element of arc d:n we have 
!-__ dt (!__!___) jw -
- _1_ 2 [~jwdx ~ d~2 - ___!__!___ (]w)3 (]~)2] ' l 
=-1-[dkmdxkdxm _ dx(Wkwk+dkmwkwml 
jw dx w2 ' 
(138.1) 
where we have used (82.3) and (101.8). In any motion such that the vortex 
lines are material, we may choose d:n as tangent to the vorticity, so that 
dxwk = dxkw. (138.2) 
In this case, (138.1) becomes 
:t (5:) = -f;k dx. (138-3) 
The vortex lines have been assumed material; by (107.3) it follows that wt wk =0 
if and only if w* =0. This yields Appell's theorem1 : In a motionsuchthat the 
vortex lines are material, in order that 
dx Jw = const (138.4) 
1 Following indications by APPELL [1921, 1, § 760], this theoremwas stated and proved 
by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 97], who showed also [ibid., § 96] that it is equivalent to a theorem 
of LAMB [1885, 5]. 
430 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 139· 
for each material element dx in the direction of the vorticity, it is necessary and 
sufficient that the motion be circulation preserving. If <'C is a finite portion of a vortex 
line, then (138.4) is equivalent to 
f dx 
]w = const. (138.5) 
'C 
Like the circulation itself, the integral (138.5) is an integral invariant. While 
circulation is calculated for any closed material circuit, the invariant (138.5) 
is calculated for any part of a vortex line. The theorem implies that if ] w increases during the course of the motion, the vortex lines are stretched. As a corollary, 
in order that J w = const for each particle in a circulation preserving motion, it is 
necessary and sufficient that the length of each vortex line remain constant1• This 
result is an interesting supplement to D'ALEMBERT's vorticity theorem (133.18). 
Let n be a unit vector. Then 
dx dx 
dxn = dx · n =] w · n 1 w = ] w .. 1 w , (138.6) 
where again dx is a material element parallel to the vorticity. Then (138.4) is 
equivalent to the statement that for a given particle dxn cx. ] w... In particular, 
we may choose n as the unit normal to a material surface and obtain v. Mises' 
theorem2 : In a circulation preserving motion, let a particle X be infinitely near 
to a material surface !/; then the distance of X from Y is proportional to the 
component of ] w normal to !/. Since, as will be shown in Sect. 184, a bounding 
surface is always material, v. MISES was able to use this theorem to discuss the 
behavior of the vorticity near a wall. 
f) Furtherspecial motions. 
139. Summary of special motions previously defined. In the foregoing sections 
of this subchapter numerous special types of motion have been defined. These 
will be listed, along with their formally simplest defining equations and references 
to our earlier discussion of them. 
First, there are classes defined by a geometrical condition: 
1. Lineal motions (Sect. 68): 
x=x(x,t), y=O, z=O, f=f(x,t). 
2. Pseudo-lineal motions of the first kind (Sect. 68): 
x=x(x,y,z,t), y=O, z=O, i=f(x,y,z,t). 
3. Pseudo-lineal motions of the second kind (Sect. 68) : 
x = x (x, t), y = y (x, t), z = z (x, t), j = j (x, t). 
4. Plane motions (Sect. 68): 
x=x(x,y,t), y=y(x,y,t), z=O, i=f(x,y,t). 
5. Pseudo-plane motions of the first kind (Sect. 68): 
x =x(x, y, z, t), y =y(x, y, z, t), z = o, =f(x, y, z, t). 
1 Cf. the more special result of CARSTOIU [1946, 4]. 2 [1909, 8, § 2.5]. 
(139.1) 
(139.2) 
(139-3) 
(139.4) 
(139-5) 
Sect. 139. Summary of special motions previously defined. 431 
6. Pseudo-plane motions of the second kind (Sect. 68) : 
x =x(x, y, t), y =y(x, y, t), z =z(x, y, t). f =f(x, y, t). (139.6) 
7. Rotationally symmetric motions (Sect. 68): 
r = r (r, z, t)' z = z (r, z, t)' (j = 0' f = f (r, z, t) . (139.7) 
Second, there kinematical classes. First among these are those defined by a 
condition of steadiness: 
8. Steady motion (Sect. 67): 
~ =:i(x). (139.8) 
9. Steady motion with steady density (Sect. 77): 
:i=~(x), Bf=f(x). B=O. 
10. Motion with steady stream lines (Sect. 75): 
. op PXae=O. 
Then there are motions defined by conditions on the stretching: 
11. Rigid motion (Sect. 84) : 
d=O. 
12. Isochoric motion (Sect. 77): 
Id=O. 
13. Dilatation (Sect. 83): 
d1 = d2 = d3 = d. 
14. Shearing (Sect. 89): 
d1 =-d3 , d2 =0. 
Finally, there are motions defined by conditions on the spin: 
15. I rrotational motion (Sect. 88) : 
W=O. 
16. Complex-lamellar motion (Sect. 110): 
p·W=O. 
17. Screw motion (Sect. 112): 
wxp=O, w=f=O. 
18. Complex-screw motion (Sect. 132): 
Vc=P/V0 , V0 =0, } 
Wc = curl Vc, WcXVc = 0. 
19. Motion with steady vorticity (Sect. 111) : 
ow 
ae=o. 
(139.9) 
(139.10) 
(139.11) 
(139.12) 
(139.13) 
(139.14) 
(139-15) 
(139-16) 
(139-17) 
(139.18) 
(139.19) 
432 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 140, 141. 
20. Circulation preserving motion (Sect. 108): 
w*=O. (139.20) 
Also, Sect. 89 concerns two very particular motions: rectilinear shearing, 
which includes simple shearing as a special case and itself a special pseudo-lineal 
motion of the first kind, and the rectilinear vortex, which includes the irrotational 
vortex as a special case. 
The next three sections describe additional special classes of motions. 
140. D' Alembert motions. Motions such that 
p (~. t) = T(t) v (~) (140.1) 
were introduced by D'ALEMBERT1• These motions have steady stream lines, 
they are isochoric if and only if v is solenoidal, and their kinematical vorticity 
numbers "WK are steady. 
Since 
p = T'v + T2v · gradv, (140.2) 
we have 
w* = curl p = T' curl v + T2 curl (curl v xv). (140.3) 
If T'JT2=f=const, then (139.20) cannot be satisfied unless w =0. Thus follows 
a theorem of D'ALEMBERT and LAGRANGE 2 : Apart from the case when 
A, B = const, AB=f=O, (140.4) 
a D' Alembert motion is circulation preserving if and only if it is irrotational. In the 
case when (140.4) holds, the condition for circulation preserving motion is that 
A curlv=curl(curlvxv); if A =0, this is merely the condition that v itself 
be the velocity field of a circulation preserving motion. Again, if v is the velocity 
field of a rotational circulation preserving motion, by {140.3) the D'Alembert 
motion (140.1) is circulation preserving if and only if T=const. From (140.1) 
and {100.3), SzEBEHELY's measure of unsteadiness assumes the form 
~= IT'i. V 
T2 lv·gradvl (140.5) 
If v=f=O and lv·gradvl=f=O, the condition (140.4) emerges as necessary and 
sufficient that ~ be steady. The theorem of D'ALEMBERT and LAGRANGE may 
thus be expressed in terms of the steadiness of ~-
141. Accelerationless motions. If 
i =0, (141.1) 
then every particle X travels in a straight line at a uniform velocity iJ (X). Despite 
the apparent simplicity of this fact, accelerationless motions have never been 
characterized in a form really manageable in the spatial description. lndeed, 
a steady accelerationless motion, typified by the rectilinear shearing motions 
(Sect. 89), is rather trivial, but when the stream lines are not steady, they are 
not straight, and the straight path lines may cross each other in a bewildering 
variety of ways. A relatively simple example was given in Sect. 71. 
1 [1752, 1, § 148]. 
2 The faulty statement and proof by D'ALEMBERT [1761, 1, § 10] were corrected by 
LAGRANGE [1762, 3, §52]. 
Sect. 141. Accelerationless motions. 433 
Following CALDONAzzol, we derive a spatial functional equation for these 
motions. In the common frame the material description of an accelerationless 
motion is 
z =z(Z) t +Z. 
Since z =f(Z), we may put (141.2) into the form 
z =f(z- zt) 0 
Conversely, if (141.3) holds, put y=z-zt; then 
(141.2) 
(141.3) 
zk = l~mYm = l~m(zm- im--zmt), (141.4) 
or (o~+tf~m) zm=O. Since o~+tf~m is Singular for at most three values oft, 
it follows that z = 0. Therefore, the functional equation (141.3) is necessary and 
sufficient for accelerationless motion. 
Returning to the material description (141.2), we now calculate the ratio 
of the elements of volume at time t and 0, by (20.9) obtaining 2 
dvfdV =] = det zk" 
= det (bkiX + t zk,IX), (141.5) 
=1 +IAt+IIAt2 +IIIAt3 , 
where we have used theexpansion of the seculardeterminant, and whereA -llzk "II· 
If We ChOOSe the present instant aS the initial instant, Zk IX beCOmeS the Spahal 
velocity gradient matrix, and for the invariants defined'by (78.5) we get the 
in terpreta tions 
lO = _1_ • _1_ d2 (dv) I B = _1_ • _1_ da (dv) I 
2 dV dt2 1=0' 6 dV dta I=O' ( 141.6) 
For accelerationless motions, these results extend (76.9) 2 • 
Given an accelerationless motion with velocity field z (Z), in order that it 
be isochoric we derive from (141.5) 3 the necessary and sufficient conditions 
IA = 0, IIA = 0, lilA= 0, (141.7) 
which were obtained by MERLIN 3, who noted that (141.7) is an assertion that 
the hodograph is degenerate. If the hodograph is a single point, the motion is 
a uniform translation. MERLIN has characterized the curves and surfaces which 
may serve as hodographs and in terms of them has shown how to construct all 
isochoric accelerationless motions. 
Other properties of accelerationless motions have been noted in Sect. 100 
and Sect. 102. 
l [1947, 1, § 3]. 2 The argument is due in principle to EuLER [1761, 2, §§ 27-35]; cf. LIPSCHITZ [1875, 
3], MERLIN [ 1938, 8, § 2). 
Generalizing this idea, KosTIUK [ 1936, 6] has considered the analytic motion 
oo Ck) (Z t) 
z = Z + .L:-3--'- yk+t 
k=O(k+1)! 
and has calculated explicitly the coefficients A k in the series 
00 
jz/ZI = 1;Ak Tk, 
k=O 
the first ones being A0 = 1, A1 = ld, and has shown by calculation at length that 
(k + 1) A.<+ 1 = Äk + A1 Ak. 
3 [1938, 8, § 2]. Cf. also [1937, 6]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/t. 28 
434 Co TRUESDELL and Ro TouPIN: The Classical Field Theorieso Secto 142o 
142. Homogeneous motions. A motion is homogeneaus if in the common 
frame it assumes the form 
z = a (t) 0 z + b (t) 0 (142o1) 
The analogy to homogeneaus strain (Secto 42) is immediate, but most of the 
results which can be read off from this analogy are of little interesto Much of 
the work on geometrical kinematics listed in Special Bibliography K concerns 
the homogeneaus case; cfo also the papers cited in footnote 1, po 331. Since any 
continuous motion may be approximated in the neighborhood of any one point 
by an appropriate homogeneaus motion, this special dass is of central importanceo 
However, we have preferred to develop general properties of general motions, 
and we leave to the reader their applications to this simplest of caseso 
In a homogeneaus motion, from (14201) we get 
(142o2) 
for the tensors of stretching and spin. It is only an application of the fundamental theorem of Secto 90 to assert that any homogeneaus motion may be regarded, 
at any given instant, as a rigid rotation superposed upon an irrotational homogeneous motion of stretching along three mutually perpendicular axeso In a 
suitable co-ordinate system, the motion of stretching assumes the form 
dl 0 0 
llill= . d2 0 ·llzll, 
. d3 
1 0 0 
= ~ (dl + d2 + d3) 1 0 ollzll+ . 1 
1 0 0 (142o3) 
+t (dl +d2- 2d3) 0 0 ·llzll+ 
0 -1 
1 0 0 
+t (dl+d3- 2d2) -1 0 ollzll· 
0 
Now simple shearing is a special case of homogeneaus motiono From (8906) we 
easily conclude that a plane homogeneaus motion is isochoric if and only if it is 
a simple shearing superposed upon a rigid rotation about an axis normal to the 
plane of shearingo Therefore, apart from a rigid rotation, the motions represented 
by the second and third matrices in (14203) are simple shearings in the planes 
normal to the second and third principal axes of stretching, respectively. The 
first matrix represents a dilatation (139.13). One of several ways of expressing 
the foregoing decomposition, due to STOKES1, is: Any homogeneaus motion may 
be regarded as composed of a rigid rotation, a uniform dilatation, and simple shearings 
in two of the planes normal to the principal axes of stretching. Cf. also Sect. 46, 
No. 2. 
Accelerationless homogeneaus motions have been characterized by TRuEsDELL2. By using (98.1h to calculate z from (142.1), we get the conditions 
1 [1845, 4, § 2]o 2 [1955, 27, § 2]. 
(142.4) 
Sect. 142. Homogeneaus motions. 435 
In the steady case these conditions reduce to 
a 2 =0, a·b = 0. (142.5) 
In the unsteady case, the general solutions a and b may be obtained from the 
algebraic system 
(1+At)·a=A, (1+At)·b=B, (142.6) 
where A and B are the initial values of a and b. If A has positive (negative) 
proper numbers, write the largest (smallest) as -1/L ( -1/t+); otherwise, write 
L=-oo (t+=+oo). Then a unique solution of (142.6) exists and is a differentiable function of t in the interval t_ < t < t+. Moreover, if m is the largest among 
the absolute values of all the proper numbers of A, then a and b are analytic 
functions oft when I tj < 1/m. Thus in general these motions do not remain continuous indefinitely but develop singularities after a finite time, determined by 
the initial velocities and velocity gradients. 
A simple example is given by 
-(J 0 0 
a = k -a 0 , b = 0, (142.7) 
-1 
where in order to satisfy (142.6) we must have 
k (t) ko (t) - __!_±_kL_ = 1 + k0 t ' a -Go 1- k0a0 t · (142.8) 
In this motion, a reetangular block with edges parallel to the co-ordinate planes 
is extended along the z-direction at the rate k (t), contracted transversely in the 
ratio a (t). The stream lines in the y = 0 plane are the curves 
z x1fa = const. (142.9) 
The ratio of the volume v at time t to the initial volume V is 
(142.10) 
whence appears that in the cases when the motion develops a singularity, the 
volume is reduced to zero. This motion is illustrated in Fig. 19. 
For an accelerationless homogeneous motion both (141.2) and (142.1) hold. 
Hence 
z=(a·z+b)t+Z. (142.11) 
We multiply each side by 1+At and use (142.6) to simplify the result, so obtaining 
(1 +At) ·Z=A·zt+Bt+ (1 +At) ·Z. 
Hence 
Z=(At+1)·Z+Bt. 
(142.12) 
(142.13) 
This gives z=A · Z + B, so that z is linear in Z as weil as in z. There is no 
essential loss in generality if we set B= 0, since its presence indicates only a 
superposed uniform translation. If B= 0, the point Z = 0 remains fixed, and 
if we consider the parallelepiped whose vertices are the points 0, Z1 , Z2 , Z3 at 
time t = 0, the material volume so defined is the parallelepiped whose vertices 
at timet are 0, z 1 , z 2 , z 3 • We may now interpret (141.5) as giving the ratio of 
the volumes of these finite parallelepipeds 1• 
1 TRUESDELL [1953, 33]. 
28* 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
436 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 142. 
In a homogeneaus motion, the principal axes of stretching and the principal stretchings themselves areuniform in space at each time. lf we relinquish the latter of these requirements, we seek motions such that in a certain reetangular Cartesian frame we have 
(142.14) 
These three conditions are necessary and sufficient for the existence of functions ~ (x, y, z, t), 
F2 (x, y, z, t), F".! (x, y, z, t) such that 
r 
r 
o2 X=i)X~2 y=ey• z=Bz;2 (142.15) . ~ . ~ . ~ ) oxoz (~+F".!)=O, oyox (.Fz+~)=O, ozoy (Fa+Fz)=O. 
--------------, 
I 
---------------, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
z 
z 
z Fig. 19 a-d .. An accelerationless deformation of a reetangular block. a) The undeformed block. The arrows are the 
velocity vectors of the particles; the light lines are their paths; the dashed straight lines are loci of particles whose 
velocities are parallel; the dashed ellipses are loci of particles having the same speed. b) Stream lines when k,t = 0. 
c) Stream lines when k0 t =I. d) Stream lines when k0 t = 2. 
The general solution of the latter three equations when put into the former three yields 
• 0 x =fiX [G3 (x, y)- G2 (x,z)], 
y = :y [G1 (y, z)- G3 (x, y)]. (142.16) 
. 0 z =Tz [G2 (x,z)- G1 (y,z)], 
where, as henceforth, the functions occurring may depend also on t. The principal stretchings 
are 
(142.17) 
Sect. 143. Motion relative to a rigid rotating frame. 437 
For the isochoric subclass, the additional condition imposed is 
()2~ + ()2~ + ()2~ - -- -- ·---- 0 ox2 8y2 8z2 • (142.18) 
Consider first the possibility Illd=Ü, equivalent to, say, 82F3f8z 2=0. From (142.15) and 
(142.18} it follows quickly that 
Hence (142.15} 1, 2 ,3 must reduce to 
()3~ --··-··- = o. 
8x 8z2 
i=f(x+y)+g(x-y)+Cxz, ) 
y = - f(x + y) + g(x- y)- C yz, 
z =- tc(x2- y2), 
(142.19) 
( 142.20) 
where the functions f and g and the constant C are arbitrary. This result was obtained by 
PRAGERl, who determined also the more restricted motions in which llld =!= 0. 
While a dilatation may be characterized by specializing the preceding results, 
it is easier 2 to start by substituting (139.13) into (84.3). whence it is immediate 
that d is a linear function, and therefore the velocity is given to within a rigid 
motion by 
z=(a·z+k)z-iz2 a, (142.21) 
where the vector a and the scalar k are functions of time only. 
g) Relative motion. 
143. Motion relative to a rigid rotating frame. Let i, j, k and i', j', k' be unit 
vectors along the co-ordinate directions of two reetangular Cartesian frames, 
and let b be the position vector of the origin 
of the primed frame relative to the unprimed 
frame. Then the position vectors p and p' 
of a given point relative to the two origins 
are related by p = b + p' (143 _1) 
(Fig. 20). If the primed frame is in motion 
relative to the unprimed, the vectors i', j', lf-' 
are assigned functions oft, and di'fdt, dj'fdt, 
d k' fd t serve to specify the rate of rotation. The 
axial vector w defined by 
- ., dj' k' + ., dk' ., + k' di' ., (143 2) W=' ae· J dl·'l ae·J . 
Fig. 20. Position vectors p and p' of the same 
point with respect to two different frames. 
is the angular velocity 3 of the primed frame with respect to the unprimed. If p 
and p' are the velocities of a given particle relative to these two frames, it is 
easy to calculate directly that 
p=b+wxp'+p'. (143.3) 
1 [1953. 23]. 2 CAUCHY [1829, 3]. 3 Recognition of the vectorial character of the angular velocity is due to EuLER [1765, 
3, § 5]. It is sometimes more convenient to replace i', f, k' by any rigid triad of independent 
vectors a, b, c. Then 
W= 
438 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
In fact, if b =0 we have the operator identity 
In particular 
p .. = Tt dp = w xp . + ----rit, d'p l 
=wx [wxp'+p'] + ~: [wxp'+.P'], 
=wx(wxp') +2wx.P'+ wxp'+p'. 
For unrestricted b, this is tobe replaced by1 
p = b + ro Xp' + w X (w X p') + 2 W X p' + p', 
Sect. 143. 
(143.4} 
(143.5) 
(143.6) 
relating the accelerations p and p'. For the higher accelerations, similarly2 
(N) (N) ( d' )N p = b + wx +dt p. (143.7) 
The formula (143.6) separates into easily identifiable parts the apparent 
acceleration in the unprimed frame arising from the rotation of the primed frame. 
The terms w X p' and 2 w x p' are traditionally named after EuLER and CoRIOLIS, 
respectively, while w X (w xp') is the centripetal acceleration. This last is always 
a lamellar field, since 
w X (w xp) = grad [i (w · p) 2 - i ru2P2]. (143.8) 
To see if the Coriolis acceleration may be lamellar, we observe that 
curl'(2wx p') =- 2w · gradp'+2w divp'. (143.9) 
For the right-hand side to vanish it is sufficient, though not necessary, that the 
velocity p' be that of a plane isochoric motion in a plane normal to w. In this 
case we have 3 
2wxp'=-grad'2ruQ', (143.10) 
where Q' is a stream function satisfying an equation of the type (161.2}. From 
(130.1}3 we see that a more general sufficient condition is that the vorticity of 
the pdmed motion be parallel to w and be substantially constant. 
Since curl'(roxp') =2w, the Euler acceleration is lamellar if and only if it 
vanishes. 
We now give a formal derivation of (143.3}, (143.6}, and certain further results, 
using reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates and a formalism valid in a Euclidean 
space of any dimension4• The equations corresponding to (143.1} are 
(143.11) 
1 An attempt of CLAIRAUT [1745, 1, Art. I, §IV] to calculate relative acceleration in a 
special case is faulty from lack of the term corresponding to 2m xjl. Correct results involving 
special cases in which 2m X p' * 0, employing special units and angular variables appropriate 
to hydraulic machines, were first obtained by EuLER [1752, 3, Probl. 1] [1753, 1, §§ 9-10] 
[1756, 1, § 35], but when he came to use reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, he obtained a 
result [1757. 3, § 37] which is erroneous in having mxp' rather than 2mXp'. The complete 
and correct result (143.6) was obtained, if rather obscurely, by CoRIOLIS [1835. 2]. 2 There is a Iiterature on this subject: LEVY [1878, 6], GILBERT [1878, 3] [1884, 1] [1888, 5] 
(1889, 3], LAISANT [1878, 4], RIVLIN and ERICKSEN [1955, 21, § 3]. Some of these authors 
obtain resolutions of <;) along the principal directions of p or in orthogonal curvilinear Coordinates. 3 TAYLOR [1916, 6, PP· 100-102]. 
' ZORAWSKI [1911, 13, § 1] [1911, 14, § 1]. 
Sect. 143. Motion relative to a rigid rotating frame. 439 
where we employ the summation convention for Cartesian tensors, where A = 
A (t), b =b (t), and 
(143.12) 
Diff(:)rentiating (143.12) yields 
Akk,.Ä_km' + Äkk'Akm' = Ü, Akk,.Ämk' + .Ä_kk,Amk' = 0. (143.13) 
The definition corresponding to (143.2) is 
wkm = Akk'Amk'• wk'm' = Akk'Akm'• (143.14) 
whence by (143.12) and (143.13) follows 
In dyadic form, the third of these relations reads w' =-w: The angular velocity 
of the unprimed frame relative to the primed is equal in magnitude but opposite 
in sign to that of the primed frame relative to the unprimed. 
We notealso that from (143.14) 
(143.16) 
In fact 
2wkm 
(N) 
= 2 Akk,Amk' 
• (N) 
= Akk'Amk'-Akk,Amk', 
• (N) • l _ ~ (N) [(N+l-P) (P) (P) (N+l-P)l 
- LJ Akk' Amk' - Akk' Amk' , 
P=O p 
(143.17) 
where each summand in brackets is skew symmetric in k and m. Similarly, 
(N +1) (f"J • (N) 
Akk' = Akk' = Akm'Amk'Amm', 
(N) 
(143.18) 
(N) • (N +1) (N) (N) 
Thus w is determined by A, A, ... , A, while A is determined by A, w, w, ... , w. 
Indeed, from (143.18) it follows that 
(N+l) (N) 
Akk' = "Pkm Amk' • 
where "Pkr:J satisfies the recurrence relation 
Thus 
N 
(N+l) _ (N+l) + "\' (N + 1) (P) (N-p) 
"Pkm - Wkm LJ p Wkq VJqm • 
P=O 
(P+l) (q+l) ) ( ) 
Akk' Amk' = VJ~, VJJ." 
(143.19) 
(143.20) 
etc. l (143.21) 
(143.22) 
440 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 144. 
generalizing (143.16)r. Putting this result into (143.17) yields an explicit formula 
for tf:] in terms of the tfJ's: 
N 
2~) = "(N) [•n(N-Pl 1n(P-1) _ 1n<P-1l 1n(N-Pl] km L..J p rkr rmr rkr rmr · P=O 
(143.23) 
Th th t 't (O) (1) (N) d t . db th t' . • (N) us e quan 1 es tf' , tf' , ... , tf' are e ermme y e quan 1hes w, w, ... , w, 
and conversely. 
Differentiation of (143.11) with respect to time, followed by use of (143.14)r, 
yields 
.ik = ~k + Äkk,z~, + Akk . .z~., } 
= bk + WkmAmk'z~, +Akk'Z~·, 
(143.24) 
a co-ordinate expression for (143.3). Differentiation of (143.24) 1 with respect to 
time, followed by use of (143.16h and (143.16)r, yields 
z" = 'iJ" + Äkk.z~. + 2Äkk'.z~. + Akk.z~., } 
= b,. + (wkm- w,.qwmq) Amk'z~, + 2wkmAmk'z~, + A""'z~ .• 
a co-ordinate expression for (143.6). Similarly, 
(N) (N) ~ (N)· (N-p) (P~ ~ z"= bk + L..J Akk' z",' 
P=O p 
(N) (N) N-1 (N) (p) 
= bk +Au· z;., + L tpf'j,.-P-1) Amk' z;.,' 
P=O p 
(143.25) 
(143.26) 
where tf' is defined by the recurrence relation (143.20). This result 1s an explicit 
form for (143.7). 
144. Invariance of stretching and spin. The analysis thus far in Part g refers 
to a single particle. Whether it be isolated or a participant in a continuous 
medium makes no difference. We now obtain results peculiar to the kinematics 
of a continuous body. If we differentiate (143.24) 2 with respect to zm, we obtain 
zk,m=A""·---az+wkqAqk' oz"'' . oif.. oz;., l 
= Akk'Ammm·Z~',m' + Wkm• 
(144.1) 
where we have used (143.11) 2 and (143.12) 2 • Taking symmetric and skew symmetric parts yields 
dkm=Akk'Amm'd~'m'• } 
Wkm = Akk'Amm'w;'m' + Wkm• 
(144.2) 
Thus the stretching tensors d and d' are related by the usual tensor law of transformation, independent of the relative motion of the two co-ordinate frames, 
while the spintensorswand w' differ by the angular velocity w. In dyadic form, 
d =d', w =w' +w. (144.3) 
These formulae embody the theorem oj Zorawski 1 : Fora given motion, observers 
in two rigid frames moving arbitrarily with respect to one another perceive the same 
Stretchings, but spins which differ by the relative angular velocity of the frames. 
1 [1911, 14, § 2]. Cf. also McVITTIE [1949, 18, § 3]. 
Sect. 145. Invariance of diffusion of vorticity and circulation. 441 
Stated in geometric terms, the result is obvious. However, the phrase "the 
same" must be interpreted in the tensor sense, given explicitly by (144.2). In 
the case of scalar invariants, however, "the same" means "numerically equal" : 
The principal stretchings and all scalar invariants of stretching have the same value 
for all observers. 
The formula (144.3)2 casts additional light upon STOKES' interpretation of 
the spin as a local angular velocity (Sect. 86). 
In view of the definition (143.14), equivalent to (144.2) is the relation 
( 144.4) 
The extension of (144.2) to the case of independently selected curvilinear co-ordinate 
systems is immediate and easy1, so lang as these systems be obtainable by a time-independent 
transformation from the zk and Zk' systems, respectively. The phrase "all observers" above 
refers to observers employing such co-ordinate systems. If, however, the co-ordinate surfaces 
themselves are in non-rigid motion with respect to the primed and unprimed frames, a more 
elaborate treatment is required and will be given below in Sects. 152 to 154. 
An important generalization of the theorem of ZoRAWSKI asserts that the 
Rivlin-Ericksen tensors A(NJ and the higher stretchings D(N) are the same for all 
observers 2 : · 
( 144.5) 
This result is really clear from (104.9) and (104.12) but may also be established 
directly. 
145. Invariance of diffusion of vorticity and circulation. A relation between 
the acceleration gradients in the two frames may be obtained by differentiating 
( 143.25)2: 
zk,m = Wkm- WkqWmq.+ 2wkqAqk' Amm·=~·.m· + Akk' Amm' Z~·.m·· (145.1) 
The skew symmetric part of this equation may be written symbolically in the 
form 3 
w* - w*' = 2 [ w - w · grad' p' + w div' p'] . (145.2) 
Comparison with (130.1) 3 yields the following theorem: The difference between the 
rates of diffusion of vorticity as apparent to two different observers equals twice the 
excess of the rate of change of angular velocity over the rate of convection of angular 
velocity, where the terms "convection" and "diffusion" are used as in Sect. 101 
and Sect. 129. 
From (145.2) it is apparent that a motion which is circulation preserving with 
respect to one observer generally fails to be so with respect to another 4• 
An analysis equivalent to the foregoing but formally simpler may be constructed in terms of the circulation. First, from (144.3h we have 5 
J da· w = J da'· w' + 2w · J da', (145.3) • d • 
since at any given instaut da =da'. By KELVIN's transformation (87.1) 2 follows 
~ d;E · p = ~ d;E' · p' + 2w@! 1. (145.4) 
1 Cf. BaBYLEW [1885, 1]. 
2 For A<Nl, this was shown by RIVLIN and ERICKSEN [1955, 21, Eq. (10.15)]; forD<Nl,it 
is implied though not explicitly stated by NoLL [1958. 8, § 9]. 3 An equivalent result was obtained by v. MisEs [1909, 8, § 2.6]. 
4 Same special circumstances in which the circulation preserving property is invariant 
have been worked out by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 47]. 6 The approachwas suggested by ZoRAWSKI [1911, 14, § 2], but he did not obtain the 
geometric interpretation (145.4). 
442 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 146. 
where @) ..L = f da · n, n being the unit vector in the direction of the angular f 
velocity. Thus the apparent circulation induced by a rotating frame equals twice 
the angular speed times the area inclosed by the projection of the circuit upon a plane 
normal to the axis of rotation. 
Now let Ctf be a material circuit, and differentiate (145.4) materially, obtaining 
dJ.a. d'J.a··· d'(rr::.) Tt'j" :X:·P=Tt'j" re ·P +2Tt W~;JJ_. (145.5) 
<{/ <{/ 
This elegant resultl is often applied to the study of atmospheric circulations. 
Formulae similar to (145.1) are easily obtained for the higher accelerations. 
Differentiating (143.26) with respect to z". yields 
(N) zk,m= L N (N) (N-p) Akk' A".".,z;..,".., (P) l 
P=O p 
CN-1) (N) N-::,1 (N) CN-P-1) (Pl, = 1flkm + Akk' A".".• z,.,, m' + L 1flkq Aqk' A".".• Zk',m', P=1 p 
(145.6) 
where we have used (143.19). By (143.20) we get 
1fl!~~J = t (w, w, ... , <Nw1J), 1flf~k1 = ~~ ... + g (w, w, ... , <Nw1J). (145.7) 
Therefore the symmetric and skew symmetric parts of (145.6) may be written 
in the symbolic forms 
d(N)= d(N)• +F(w, ... ,<~ ), d', ... , d(N-1l', W', ... , w(N-1)'), } 
(145.8) 
w (N) (NJ• (N-1) G( (N-2) d' d(N-1)• , (N-1)') =W + w + w, ... , w, , ... , ,w, ... ,w_,. 
146. Condition for steady motion. The definition (67.5) of steady motion 
refers to a particular frame and plainly is not invariant with respect to rotating 
co-ordinates. Following analysis given by ZoRAWSKI 2, we now seek to determine 
whether or not there exists a rotating frame in which a particular given motion 
is steady. While a solution to this problern is not known, it is worthwhile to carry 
the analysis as far as possible. 
First, if f=f(z,t), set f'(z',t)==f(z(z',t),t), where z(z',t) is the function 
defined by the right-hand side of (143.11h; then for the partial time derivative 
of f' with z' held constant we have 3 
o'j' of az,. ---ae=ae+Ttt·"' 
at · , · =Te+ (A,.,.,z,.+ bk) 1,%• 
of 
=ae + (w"".z"' + a") 1, 11 , 
where we have used both (143.11h and (143.11) 2 and have put 
a11 == b11 - wk".b".. 
(146.1) 
(146.2) 
1 In the case W= const, it was regarded as well known by PoiNCARE [1893, 6, § 158] 
and was rediscovered by V. BJERKNES [1902, 1]; a formal derivation using (145.2) was constructed by TRUESDELL [1954, 24, § 81). 
2 [1911, 13]. Cf. also DE DONDER [1912, 2). 
3 A vectorial form of (146.1) was derived by ]ARRE [1951, 13, § 3]. 
Sect. 147. The generalproblern of invariance with respect to moving observers. 443 
We now differentiate (143.24)1 partially with respect to t, holding z' constant. 
By (146.1) follows 
(146.3) 
Use of several of the formulae of Sect. 143, induding the inverse of {143.24), 
allows us to put this result into the form 
(146.4) 
In order, then, that there exist a frame in which the motion is steady, it is necessary and sufficient that 
(146.5) 
This condition is expressed entirely in terms of the given velocity field z (z, t). 
It is evident that only in most exceptional cases will the differential equations 
(146.5) admit a solution w(t), a(t). Conditions of integrability for (146.5) are 
not known 1 . 
147. The general problern of invariance with respect to moving observers. 
From (143.24), (143.25), and (145.1) we see that some quantities of central interest in kinematics do not transform as tensors with respect to change of frame. 
In the cases considered, a quantity was defined by a fixed rule in each of two 
arbitrarily selected frames, after which the connection between the two quantities 
was established. 
A different problern must be considered now. Euclidean space demand'i the 
study of rigid motion, and under such a motion some important kinds of statement fail of invariance;, unavoidably, we encounter the notion of a preferred 
frame. In Sect. 196 we shall give a dynamical specification of certain frames in 
reference to the laws of dassical mechanics; in the sections following now we 
construct certain kinematical dasses. 
Given a dass Po of preferred frames such that a certain group 0 of linear 
time-dependent transformations ( 143.11) carries this dass into itself, consider 
a quantity \V 0 defined for each member of Po and transforming as a tensor field 
under the group • Let F be the dass of all rigid frames, and let ~ be the 
group of linear time-rlependent transformations among them 2• Then 0 is a 
subgroup of ~. Thus it is in order to define a quantity \V suchthat 
1. In Po. \V = \Vo, 
2. \V is a tensor under ~. 
1 Much of ZoRAWSKr's paper consists in an attempt to express such conditions in kinematical form, but the attempt is a failure. Though more elaborately stated, his result 
is equivalent to the obvious fact that in order for the motion to be steady, it is necessary 
that there exist a framein which the quadric of stretching and the vorticity vector are steady. 
2 The group property of these transformations may be established as follows. Writing 
( 143.11) 1 and a second transformation of the same kind in matrix form, viz. 
z' = A · (z - b), z" = A * · (z'- b'), 
where A and A * are orthogonal, we obtain 
z"=A.·(z-b.), where A.=A*-A, b.=b+A-l.b'. 
Therefore the succession of two such transformation is of the same kind. That the inverse 
is of the same kindisimmediate from (143.11) 2 • Any transformation of ~ is determined by 
specification of the image of some one frame; conversely, any such specification determines 
an element of the group. 
444 Co TRUESDELL and Ro ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theorieso Secto 1480 
In fact, W 0 need not be a tensor, but may satisfy any definite law of transformations under c!P0 ; we then demand that it satisfy a corresponding law under <!Po 
Our problem, then, is one of extension of a field defined in special circumstances so as to get a field defined more generally. We remark first that the 
definition of W in a general frame will generally involve the form of the transformation to that frame from a special one1 • Second, when W 0 is a tensor the 
extension is always possible and the result is unique; however, it may disagree 
with the result of using other and sometimes desirable rules for defining W. 
Third, if Wo is not a tensor, there is no assurance that a solution to the problern 
exists or is unique, since there is ambiguity in specifying a corresponding law 
under c!P. 
An important dass F0 is the dass of frames at rest with respect to a given 
frame. The corresponding group c!P0 consists in those transformations (143.11) 
for which A = const, b = const. Other dasses Po of preferred frames which are 
of kinematical interest are defined in terms of a particular motion: by the principal directions of its stream lines, by its principal axes of stretching, etc. The 
motion itself may then be referred to a frame based upon these directions. Preferred frames of kinematical interest may also be suggested by the geometry 
of the underlying space. Of course, use of a given rule in different preferred frames 
will generally lead to different invariantso 
The problern we have set is purely kinematical. Its usefulness will appear 
in Sect. 293, where we discuss constitutive equations for materials. These equations should be invariant with respect to motion of the observer. By what 
we have said above, such invariance will imply the use of a preferred frame, 
to be chosen on the basis of some intrinsic property of the motion or of the 
material. 
148. Co-rotational frames. Following the motion of a single partide Z, we 
may choose a moving frame with origin z' = 0 at the place z occupied by Z at 
time t, and such that both z' = o and w' = o at z' = o. Such a frame, whose 
origin is always at Z and whose angular velocity tensor is exactly the spin tensor 
w atZ, may be called co-rotational2. It is only a rewording of a familiar proposition in rigid kinematics to assert that any two co-rotational frames for the same 
particle are related by an orthogonal transformation which is constant in time 3 • 
The foregoing statement empowers us to refer to a quantity as a "tensor in 
a co-rotational frame", without specifying which co-rotational frame we select, so 
long as we continue to fix attention on a single partide. Taking up the problern 
of extension set in Sect. 147, we let Po be the dass of co-rotational frames, and 
we first consider quantities which transform as tensors under c!P0 • 
Still more specifically, let W be a tensor under the entire group c!P: 
W~· .. om' =Au···· Amm' Wk .. om· 
Differentiating with respect to t with Z held constant yields 
(148.1) 
~~· .. om·=Akk'· .. Amm' ~k ... m +.Ä.kk'. · · Amm' Wk ... m+ · ·· + Akk'. o .Ämm' Wko .. m· (148.2) 
1 Thus our problern differs somewhat from the problern of extension discussed eogo by 
VEBLEN [1927, 8, Chapo VI, §§ 5. 13 -17]0 2 Theseframeswereintroduced byZAREMBA [1903, 20and 21, §§2-4] [1937. 12, § 2] and 
were employed by HENCKY [1929, 3, § 2] and FROMM [1933, 3, §§I, V Ab]; in elaborating 
ZAREMBA's ideas, THOMAS [1955, 24, § 2] [1955. 25, § 3] used the term "kinematically 
preferred co-ordinate systems '' 0 3 Treatments in the present notation have been given by ZoRAWSKI [1911, 13, § 3]. 
THOMAS [1955, 25, § 3], MARGULIES [1956, 15] 0 
Sect. 148. Co-rotational frames. 445 
Thus W is not a tensor under 49. However, if we restriet attention to any subgroup 
whose members are suffering relative translation only, by {143.14) we have 
Ä =0, and hence W is a tensor under this subgroup. In particular, from the 
italicized statement above it follows that this holds for the subgroup 490 of transformations among co-rotational frames. We now define the co-rotational time flux 
of \V, dr \V jdt, as that tensor under 49 which reduces to W at the origin of a corotational frame. Since at the origin of a co-rotational frame we have 8 \V Jot= W 
we might equally well have used 8\Vjot in setting up the definition. 
To calculate the form of the operator drfdt in any frame, let primes refer to 
a co-rotational frame. Then {144.4) yields 
{148.3) 
By Substitution in {148.2) follows 
wk', m·=Akk' ... Amm' Wk m + } ... . . . {148.4) 
+ wkqAqk' ... Amm' \Vk ... m + ... + Akk' ... WmqAqm' \Vk ... m· 
Hence 
dr't'k m A A •' ) --dt...___ = kk' · •• mm' 'fk' ... m'• 
-w -w w -···-w w - k •.• m kq q ... m mq k ... q• 
{148.5) 
This is the result proved by ZAREMBA for tensors of the second order. To verify 
that dr\Vfdt is indeed a tensor, we need only observe that since w' =0, on the 
left-hand side of {148.4) we may replace w; .... m' by w; .... m'- w~'q' w; .... m'- ... -
w:..'q' w; .... q'. 
It is easy to show that in a co-rotational frame we have 
d~'*'k' ... m' (Nl, 
--;[iN~= 'fk' ... m' · ( 148.6) 
That is, N successive applications of drfdt yields the same result as does extension 
of dNjdtN, or of oNjotN. 
If we introduce general curvilinear co-ordinates, so long as these be stationary, 
there is only one tensor which reduces to {148.5) in a reetangular Cartesian 
system. This tensor is given by 
d '*'k ... m 
_r_/>_·-..:'1_ = wk ... m_wk wr ... m_ ... -wm \Vk ... r -w r \Vk ... m_ ... -w r liJk ... m 
dt p ... q r p ... q r p ... q p r ... q q '~'p ... r · (148.7) 
For the metric tensor gkm• by (72.10) this gives 
drgk'!'_ _ _ q _ q _ 
dt - Wk gqm Wm gkq- 0 · {148.8) 
Hence raising and lowering of indices commutes with drfdt. 
Since x' = 0 and w' = 0 at the origin of the co-rotational system, it lS an 
immediate consequence of the definition of drfdt that 
dN ·k r X 
dtN = 0, {148.9) 
This does not follow, however, from (148.7). In fact (148.7) was derived on the 
assumption that \V itself is a tensor under 49, while neither x nor w enjoys this 
property, being subject rather to the transformation laws (143.24) and (144.2) 2 • 
However, as we have said, the process of extension may be applied to quantities 
446 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 149. 
which transform as tensors only under the subgroup , and this is the case for~ 
and w. If we carry out the process of extension for :e, we find that we are led 
through just the same steps as were used to derive (143.24), except that b =0, 
z' =0, and z' =0, and this yields (148.9h for the case N = 1. Similarly, it is 
possible to derive (148.9) 2 by differentiating (144.2) 2 and evaluating the result 
at the origin of a co-rotational system. From (148.9) 2 we get1 
dr · dr (d ) drdkm } ([ixk,m= ~t km+w,.m =~, 
= d,.m + w,.qdqm + WmqdqiH 
(148.10) 
where, since (144.2h asserts that d is a tensor under ~. the last step follows from 
(148.7). This formula illustrates the fact that for tensors under 0 the operation 
drfdt need notcommutewith thecovariantderivative. By(148.9h, (drx,.fdt),m=O. 
Further_properties of the extensions of a tensor, defined as those tensors under ~ which 
reduce to &N w foz/.· az;,., ... ot ... ot at the origin of a co-rotational system, have been noticed 
by THOMAS2. 
149. Irrotational frames. We shall call a frame irrotational of order N1 + N2 
if at two times ta, a = 1, 2, its orientations with respect to a common frame are 
assigned and also for a particle at the origin we have 
w<•l' = 0, r = 1, 2, ... , Na, (149.1) 
where w<•l' is defined by (103.4) 2 • For the case when N2 =0, these frames were 
introduced by RIVLIN and ERICKSEN 3, who selected the orientation at time t1 
as that of the fixed spatial frame, the orientation at time t2 as that of the spatial 
axes of finite strain for the deformation from x(X, t1) to x(X, t2). 
Using (145.8), we may prove by induction that to satisfy the requirement 
<Na-1) 
( 149.1) we need only assign certain values to w, <.Ö, ••• , w at the tim es t0 • The existence of irrotational frames is then a consequence of the following theorem of 
NOLL 4 : 
There are infinitely many transformations (143.11) suchthat 
1. A(ta) =A0 , where A 1 and A 2 are arbitrarily assigned rotation matrices, both 
proper or both improper; 
2. b (t0) = b0 , where b 1 and b2 are arbitrary; and 
3. w (ta), <.Ö (t0}, ... , (~) (t0 ) are assigned arbitrarily. 
Passing to the proof, we note that to satisfy Condition 2 is trivial, and that 
without loss of generality we may assume the A0 both proper. Further, it is 
possible to express the general proper rotation A as an analytic function A (A, f.l, v) 
of three parameters .1, f.l, v in such a way that A(O, o, o) =1; e.g., we may employ 
EULER's angles. Specifying A is thus equivalent to specifying three functions 
.Ä.(t), f.l(t), v(t). From (143.14)1 we have, writing A' for the transpose of A, 
w = Ä · A' = i A • · A' + ti. A · A' + .PA . A' ,~~. r ,p ,,. ' (149.2) 
so that wand i,p,,;, determine each other uniquely, as is geometrically evident. 
Moreover, w vanishes if and only if i, p, and ;, vanish. By induction it may be 
1 THOMAS [1955, 25, § 6]. I [1955, 25, § 7]. 3 [1955. 21, §§ 5, 15]. 
' Not previously published. 
Sect. 149. Irrotational frames. 447 
shown that the set of quantities A, ro ,w, ... , ~l is uniquely determined by the . • • • • (N+l) (N+l) (N+l) (k) 
set of quanhhes Ä, p., v, Ä, p., v, ... , Ä, p., v, and conversely; also ro = o for • • (k+l) (Hl) (k+l) 
k=0,1, ... ,Nifandonlyif Ä =p. = v =Ofork=0,1, ... ,N. Theproblem 
is thus reduced to finding three functions Ä (t), p. (t), v (t) such that ~l(t ), ~) (ta), (~ (ta), 
k=O, 1, ... , N0 +1, are prescribed. There are infinitely many such functions; 
e.g., it is possible to determine them as polynomials of degree N1 + N2 + 1. 
Q.E.D. 
We may determine the dass of all frames satisfying Conditions 1, 2, 3 as 
follows. Let z' =A (Ä, p., v) · (z- b) be a transformation to any one frame, 
determined as above. Let b*(t) be any vector such that b*(t0 ) =0, and let 
(k) (k) (k) 
Ä *, p.*, v* be any three functions such that Ä (ta) = p. (ta) = v (ta) = 0 for k = 0, 1, ... , 
Na+ 1. Then any frame of the type sought may be obtained by a transformation 
of the form 
z' =A(l+l*,p.+p.*,v+v*) · [z-(b+b*)]. (149.)) 
• (k) (k) • • (k) (k) (k) 
Smce A = 1 for k = 0, 1, ... , Na + 1, 1f and only 1f Ä = p. = v = 0 for k = 0, 1, ... , 
Na+ 1, transformations carrying one of the frames sought into another are of 
the form 
z' =A(Ä*,p.*,v*) · (z- b*), (149.4) 
and these form a group. 
When N;=O, it is possible to indicate a simple solution. Writing N=:N,_, from (143.14) 
we see that we are to find a solution of 
Cr> 
where ,gc•>==g;(t1); moreover, the solution is to satisfy (143.12). 
degree N satisfying (149.5), namely 
• ~ r>Cr> (t- t1)' Akk'Amk'= L.."•4 km--,-. r. r=O 
(149.5) 
There is a polynomial of 
(149.6) 
Since !J~Jn= -!J~k• any solution A of (149.6) satisfies Au'Amk'= o; hence a solution satisfying (143.12) at one time satisfies it at all times. For such a solution, (149.6) is equivalent to 
. LN <r> (t-t,)' Akk'= !JkmAmk'---. r! r=O 
(149.7) 
This isalinear differential system for A; it has polynomial coefficients and therefore a unique 
solution A*(t) suchthat A*(t1) =A1 • The matrix A(t) given by 
{( t-t )N+l } A(t)=A*·exp t,-~ log[(A•)-LA1) (149.8) 
then satisfies Condition 1 as weil as Condition 3 with .N,= 0. 
An invariant time flux based upon time differentiation in an irrotational 
frame has been constructed by CoTTER and RIVLIN1• As might be expected 
from the difficulties mentioned above, they do not attempt the extension process 
directly. Rather, they appear to lay down the following requirements for the 
M-th time flux dt' \V fdtM of an absolute tensor \V : 
1. dfl \V fd tM shall be a tensor under ~. 
2. In any irrotational frame with origin at the point in question and with 
N~ M, dt' \V fdtM shall reduce to a linear combination of the material derivatives 
(p) 
\V with p =1, 2, ... , M. 
1 [1955. 4]. 
448 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 150. 
These requirements do not determine dfl W fdtM uniquely. The particular 
choice made by CoTTER and RIVLIN, in the special case they consider, coincides 
with the result to be obtaine~ by a different method in the section following. 
150. Convected time flux. If we select three independent families of material 
surfaces, whose equations may be taken as X"'= const, their configurations at 
time t define a convected Co-ordinate system for the given motion1. Setting xk= 
b! X"', we thus describe the motion in terms of a specially selected moving Coordinate system. lt is usual to define body tensor fields as tensors under transformations of the X"' and spatial tensor fields as tensors under transformations 
of the xk. lt is possible, in any given case, to associate a pair of such fields in 
such a way that their components are respectively equal. In such a case, the 
motion of the co-ordinate system xk will generally prevent the time derivatives 
of the two fields from being equal. 
In the convected co-ordinate system, lengths are determined from a varying 
squared element of arc: 
(150.1) 
G is related to the tensors denoted by g and C in Sects. 14 and 26: At time t0 
the components of G coincide with the components of g, while at time t the 
components of G coincide with the components of C. These remarks suggest 
how the formalism of convected co-ordinates may be used to treat the subjects 
developed in the foregoing sections by other and in our opinion preferable methods. Our purpose in introducing convected co-ordinates here is for the following special application. 
Let W be a tensor field of weight Wunder the group <1P of all co-ordinate transformations, including transformations to moving co-ordinates. Then the material 
derivative, ..V, is not generally a tensor under <!P. However, since the convected 
co-ordinates X"' for a particle X do not change in time, \j! is a tensor under the 
subgroup <IP0 of transformations of convected co-ordinates. (The formal proofs 
of these statements are analogous to those given at the beginning of Sect. 148.) 
The convected time flux dc W jdt of W is defined as that tensor under <!P which reduces to ..V in a convected co-ordinate system. To calculate dc W fdt, we follow 
the method of ÜLDROYD 2. 
1 General references for such co-ordinates were given in Sect. 66B. Cf. also the remark 
of ZAREMBA [1903, 2J, pp. 619-620]. 2 [1950, 22, § 3a]. CoTTER and RrvLrN [1955. 4] approach the convected time flux in 
a special case by a method analogaus to that we have used to calculate the tensors k(N) in 
Sect. 104. It is easy to generalize their method so as to yield ( 1 50.6). 
The idea of convected time flux may be traced back to a very s:pecial case given by 
CAUCHY [ 1829, 4]; in effect, he defined tkm by the requirement that tkmdakd xm = tkmdakd xm, 
where t is an absolute tensor and da is an element of area; the result is the same asthat of 
taking t to be a tensor of weight 1 in the first place. Cf. TRUESDELL [1953. 32, §55 bis]. 
HELMHOLTZ [1892, 5, § 5] in formulating a type of variation suitable for Hamiltonian 
principles in spatial co-ordinates was led by some rather mysterious steps to put 
Öp= 0:t:E + curl(pXÖ:E)+pdivÖ:E-Ö:E'divp. 
By the same vectorial identities that Iead from (98.1) 2 to (99.14), this formula is equivalent to 
~ • 0 Ö:E • ~ ~ • up = ----a/ + p · grad u:E- u:E · grad p, 
= Ö:E- öx · gradp, 
as was remarked by C. NEUMANN [1897. 7], whose derivation is equally mysterious. By 
(150.6), however, this last result is a statement that Öp is tobe calculated in a convected 
co-ordinate system. Cf. the next footnote. 
Sect. 150. Convected time flux. 449 
Since \II is a tensor under ~. we may calculate its components \11"·::.~ in any 
fixed system x" in terms of its components \11~:::~ in any convected system by 
the usual law of transformation: 
(% ••• {J_ ox" ox"' - I w k ... m oxP oxq \ll" ... "ox«'"axtJ -lzXI \l!p ... q ax"··· oXd' 
f./Ir··--·-
(150.2) ~-=---·--·------
For a given particle X, the co-ordinates X« in any one convected co-ordinate 
system do not change. Letting DfDt denote the partial derivative with X held 
constant, as in Sect. 72, by operating with DfDt on (150.2) we get 
D'*"a. ... {J oxk ox"' [ oik ox"' oxli oi"'] ;i··" ox« ... oxP +\II~:J -ax« ··· ox'ii + ··· + ax« ··· oxP 
w{[ o'*""···"' o'*""···"' ] o P o q = I z/XI p ... q + p ••• q xs _x_ .. · -~- + 
ot ox• oXY ()Xe! 
k ... m [ oiP ()xq oxP ()iq l 
+\llp ... q ()XY ... ()Xe!+ ... + oXY ... ()Xe! + 
(150-3) 
W oi• k ... m oxP ()xq} + ox• \llp ... q oXY ... ()Xe! ' 
where we have used i"=Dx"fDt [this being (67.1) expressed in the present 
notation] and 
Dt oX« axa. 
oi" ox"' 
axm ax«. 
Putting this result into (150.3) shows that if we set 
_c_p d '*""···"' a'*",....... a'*""···"' a •• a ·• ) ... q = p ... q + p ... q i• + mk ... m X + + mk m X 
dt - ot ox• "'s ... q oxP ... "'P:::s ()xq -
oi" oi"' ai• - \llj;::~ ax• - ... - \11~:::~ ax• + W\11~:::;' ax• • 
(150.4) 
(150.5) 
then these quantities fumish the components in the x" system of the tensor 
whose components in the xa. system are D \II~:JfDt. By (72.3), in the previous 
sentence we may replace D\11/Dt by \f, since \II~:J is a body tensor field. Thus 
the right-hand side of (150.5) gives the desired convected time flux. 
The so-called Lie derivative1 of \II with respect to v is given by 
f:\11 11 ···"'== 8 \11 11 ···"'v"+\1!"···"'8 v"+ ... +\11"· .. "'8 v•- } " p ... q s p ... q •... q p p.... q 
- \111>:::;' 8,v"- · · · - \11~:::~ 8,v"' + W\11~:::;' 8,v•. (150.6) 
Thus (150.5) may be written in the form 
dc'*" = ~ + f: \II (150.7} dt ot :;, • 
showing that the Lie derivative is the special case of the convected time flux 
that results when \II is steady. In Sect. 153 we shall see that a four-dimensional 
1 SLEBODZINSKI [1931, 10], VAN DANTZIG [1932, 13, § 3], SCHOUTEN and VAN KAMPEN 
[1934, 7, § 1], ScHaUTEN and STRUIK [1935, 4, § 12]. A very general exposition of the nature 
and properties of this derivative is given by ScHaUTEN [1954, 21, Chap. III, § 10]. The 
German verb associated with a convected co-ordinate system is "mitschleppen"; a virtual 
transliteration occurs in some works ostensibly written in English. WuNDHEILER [1932, 14, 
§ 2] introduced a differential of the type 
"v"= dv 11 + r" v"'dxi>+A" v"'dt u mp m • 
which transforms as a contravariant vector under time-dependent transformations of coordinates. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 29 
450 C. TRuESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 150. 
treatment enabling identification of convected time flux with a more general Lie 
derivative is possible also for unsteady motions. 
In works on geometry the invariant character of :E W is established in con- v 
siderable generality. Our treatment above shows that the right-hand side of 
(150.5) is a tensor under transformations from a convected to a fixed co-ordinate 
system, but it is not obviously a tensor under transformations of fixed systems. 
However, the fixed system has not been restricted in any way, and we may 
choose it as reetangular Cartesian. In this case (150.5) may be written 
_c_P.._.'l_ 0 'l'k ... m = Wk ... m+Wk ... m_xs + ... +Wk ... m_xs _ ws. .. m_xk _ ... l 
ot p ... q s ... q ,p p ... s ,q p ... q ,s 
- wk ... s _im+ wwk ... m .xs p ... q ,s p ... q ,s. 
( 150.8) 
The right-hand side of ( 150.8) is plainly a tensor under all co-ordinate transformations. Being established for a single choice of a fixed co-ordinate system, 
( 150.8) is thus valid in all fixed systems. Alternatively, it is possible to transform (150.8) into (150.5) by writing out the explicit forms of the covariant 
derivatives. For actual calculation, (150.5) is preferable. 
If we apply (150.8) to the metric tensor gkm itself, we getl 
(150.9) 
The convected time flux of the metric tensor is twice the stretching tensor, and 
only in a rigid motion do we have dcgfdt =0. This is really obvious from the 
definition of the convected time flux. However, it has the important consequence 
that at a point where W does not vanish, dcfdt commutes with raising and lowering 
of indices of W if and only if the motion is rigid. In fact, since ak=gkmam, we 
have identically dc(ak- gkmam)fdt =0, and hence 
(150.10) 
specimens of the rules which hold for general W. 
In the derivation of (150.5) and (150.8) we have used the tensor law of transformation ( 150.2) from a convected to a fixed co-ordinate system. This might 
seem to imply that our results are applicable only to quantities W which transform as tensors under the motion itself. This is not so. Wehave employed (150.2) 
only at a single instant, and the formulae used in passing from (150.3) to (150.5) 
need hold only at that instant. At this one instant, we may choose any convected 
and fixed co-ordinates we please; for example, we may choose the two sets of 
co-ordinate surfaces as instantaneously identical, as is done by many authors. 
We thus obtain (150.5) without the necessity of assuming that W enjoys any 
particular transformation property under the motion itself. 
It is interesting, however, to investigate properties under the entire motion. 
If dcakfdt=O and dcbkfdt=O over an interval of time, we have 
(150.11) 
1 HENCKY [1925, 7]. ZELMANOV [1948, 39, Eq. (10)] has ca]culated the flux of the Riemann tensor; the terms involving the rotation tensor in his result seem to us to cancel one 
another. 
Sect. 151. Cantrast of the various time fluxes. 451 
The general solutions of these differential equations are 
(150.12) 
where A and B are arbitrary. Thus d0 akjdt = 0 is equivalent to the assertion 
that ak is carried by the motion as a contravariant vector, or materialline segment; d0 bkjdt =0, that bk is carried as a covariant vector, or plane area. 
Since, as just established, we have d0 ( d xk)jdt = 0, it follows that 
.t~J. aN (as2) aN g d s2 = ~-- = _c __ k_'!!__ d xk d xm 
atN dtN ' (150.13) 
where the first step is a consequence of the fact that d0 jdt reduces to the material 
derivative when applied to a scalar. Comparison with (104.2) yields1 
A (N) - d~ gPJ_ 
pq - dtN • (150.14) 
Generalizing ( 150.9), this formula offers a new interpretation for the RivlinEricksen tensors A (NJ. 
151. Contrast of the various time fluxes. The three time fluxes, drfdt, dJdt, and 
djdt, are in general different from one another. Since an explicit form for dJdt 
has not been calculated, we omit it from the discussion. Comparison of (148.7) 
and (150.8) for an absolute tensor W::: yields 
('!.c - ~r) wk ... m_ ds wk ... m+ ... + as wk ... m_ dk ws ... m- ... - dm wk ... s (151.1) dt dt p ... q- P s ... q q p ... s 5 p ... q s p ... q· 
Consequently, the co-rotational and convected time fluxes equal one another if: 
1. W is a scalar; or 
2. 'V = 0 at the place and time in question; or 
3· The motion is locally and instantaneously rigid. 
In cases 1 and 2 we have 
(151.2) 
Returning to Sect. 147, we see that a flux satisfying Requirement 2 is indeterminate to within an arbitrary tensor which vanishes when d = 0. The problern 
of constructing the mostgeneralinvariant time flux is then equivalent to finding 
the most general tensor under 49 which vanishes in a rigid motion. We do not 
know of any solution to this problem. 
Invariant time fluxes are required for the formation of correct constitutive 
equations for materials (Chap. G). Special circumstances may make one or 
another flux appear preferable. From a purely kinematical standpoint, however, 
the most that can be done is to make the meaning of each flux clear. d0Wjdt 
is a measure of the instantaneous departure of the rate of change of 'V from the 
value it would assume if W were carried as a tensor under the motion itself. 
drWfdt and diWjdt are, in different senses, the rates of change of 'V as apparent 
to an observer whose frame of reference is carried by the medium and turns 
with it. 
It is clear that any fluxes defined in terms of the motion of the material will 
depend upon w when referred to a common frame. The co-rotational flux drWfdt 
is thus the siruplest possible, in that it depends on w only, not on d or on higher 
1 ÜLDROYD [1950, 22, § 3a]. 
29* 
452 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 152. 
derivatives of ~. The most striking advantage of d.Wjdt is expressed by (148.8) 
and the statement following it. Since in particular problems in Euclidean space 
there is usually no circumstance indicating contravariant or covariant character, 
rather than merely tensorial character, for the quantities occurring, a flux operator 
that commutes with the raising and lowering of indices seems most natural. 
Finally, the simple way in which extension of non-tensorial quantities from their 
values in a co-rotational frame may be achieved is a further recommendation 
for drWfdt. 
152. World invariant kinematics. In the preceding sections of this subchapter we have studied various properties of a motion within the mathematical 
framework of 3-dimensional tensor analysis. We now present essentially the 
same considerations within a unified formalism of 4-dimensional tensors1 • As 
preparations we introduce the following notions from geometry. 
rx) Same geometrical preliminaries. An n-dimensional space S is a set of points 
p such that to every point there corresponds a subset 'YJ (p) containing p which 
can be placed in one-to-one correspondence with the ordered sets of n real numbers 
xr = ( xl, x2, ... , xr.) lying in some interval x{;- hr < xF < x{; + hr, hr> 0 and such 
that p corresponds to x{;. A Co-ordinate transformation xr· = xr· (a:), xr = xF (a:*) 
is regarded as replacing the one-to-one correspondence p-(xr) by another one, 
p-(xr•). The geometry of the space S may sometimes be determined by a group 
~ of allowable co-ordinate transformations. Elements of the group ~ relate the 
preferred co-ordinate systems of the space 5. A field (figure) in the space S is 
represented by an ordered set of functions 1/.J = (<P1 (a:), <Pda:), ... , <P!ll (a:)) having 
an assigned law of transformation under ~. The representation <Pm (a:) in any 
one preferred co-ordinate system xr and the co-ordinate transformation xr• = 
xr• (a:) uniquely determine the representation <Pmo(a:*) of the field 1/.J in every 
other preferred Co-ordinate system w·. One also considers spaces s characterized 
by a group of allowable co-ordinate transformations ~ and one or more fields 1/J. 
By choosing different groups 4P and different assigned fields 1/J, we obtain various 
familiar examples of geometric spaces. Thus ordinary Euclidean metric space 
corresponds to letting ~ be the group of 3-dimensional orthogonal transformations 
~.o. where with this choice for ~ the set of fields 1/.J is empty. However, we can 
also characterize ordinary 3-dimensional Euclidean metric space by the group ~~ 
of unrestricted analytic transformations provided we let 1/.J be an analytic Euclidean metric tensor field gkm(a:). The two spaces so defined are regarded as equivalent. 
Curved Riemannian spaces, affinely connected spaces, conformal spaces, etc., 
correspond to various other choices of the pair of objects (~. 1/J). The foregoing 
example of Euclidean metric space shows that different choices of (~. 1/.J) may 
define spaces regarded as equivalent. 
An invariant of a field 1JI' in a space S with group ~ is a property possessed 
in common by each of its representations lf'm (a:). Joint invariants of a set of 
fields 1JI'1 , v·2 , ••• , 1JI' !1l areinvariant properties of the fields held singly and jointly. 
The geometry of a field 1J1' in a space S with assigned fields 1/.J is the theory of 
the joint invariants of 1JI' and 1/J. 
1 CARTAN [1923, 1, §§ 7, 15-17] initiated a 4-dimensional treatment of classical kinematics which has been extended and developed by DEFRISE [1953, 8]. The same class of 
problems has been approached by McVITTIE [1949. 18], via a detour through the kinematics 
of special relativity theory. DE DoNDER [1931, 4, § 3] and KILCHEVSKI [1938, 5, § 7] have 
constructed a 4-dimensionally invariant formalism for finite strain. Here we follow TouPIN 
[1958. 9]. 
Sect. 152. World invariant kinematics. 453 
ß) Euclidean and Galilean space-time. Consider now the 4-dimensional spaces 
S(f and Slli defined by the following groups of preferred CO-Ordinate transformations1: 
I. Euclidean space-time S(f and the group ~(f of Euclidean transforma tions: 
zk: = A~ (z4) zm + bk' (z4) , } 
z4 = z4 + const 
{152.1) 
where A~ and dk' are analytic functions of z4 and A~ is an orthogonal matrix. 
II. Galilean space-time Slf and the group ~lli of Galilean transformations: 
zk' = A~zm+ uk' z4 + const, } 
z4' = z4 + const, 
where A~ is a constant orthogonal matrix and the uk' are constants. 
A point z in either of these 4-dimensional spaces is called an event. 
{152.2) 
Let a motion of a material medium in Euclidean or Galilean space-time be -1 
defined by a set of three scalar functions ZK (z) such that the matrix CK L (z), 
where 
K_ azK 
8;Z =~. uz• 
is positive definite, this definition being consistent with (29.1 )2 • 
{152.3) 
The geometry of a motion in S~ or Sl!i will be called E~eclidean kinematics 
and Galilean kinematics, respectively. Since ~lli is a subgroup of ~(f and a motion 
in either space-time is defined in the same way, it is clear that any Euclidean 
invariant of a motion is also a Galilean invariant of a motion but that the converse 
is not necessarily true. 
y) General co-ordinates in Euclidean and Galilean space-time. A primary objective in this 4-dimensional treatment of classical kinematics is the systematic 
study of the invariants of a motion under the Euclidean and Galilean groups 
expressed in terms of curvilinear and possibly deforming co-ordinates. Such 
co-ordinate systems are related to the zr in ( 152.1) and ( 152.2) by transformations 
of the general form 
x• = x'(z', z4), } 
x4 = z4 + const, (152.4) 
where the x•(z) are unrestricted analytic functions of the four co-ordinates z. 
The set of all transformations having the form (152.4) constitutes a group which 
is a subgroup of the group ~m of unrestricted analytic transformations on allfour 
Co-ordinates of events. General Co-ordinates in S~r. or sl!i will be denoted by xr, 
and a typical element of ~'ll is written in the form 
xr' = xr'(~). xr= xr(~'). (152.5) 
Weshall develop here a formalism for Euclidean and Galilean kinematics which 
is invariant under 91 • Since the transformations (152.4) relating general curvilinear and deforming co-ordinates form a subgroup of the more general transformations 91 , the classical problern of introducing curvilinear and deforming 
1 For the remainder of this subchapter, Latin indices will range over the three values 
!, 2, and 3. Greek indiceswill range over the four values 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
454 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 152. 
co-ordinates will then be solved. The concepts needed to construct such a formalism for kinematics are embodied in Klein's principle1 : 
I f in any space with group ® 1 the subgroup ®2 is introduced, consisting in all 
transformations which leave a figure (field) l/>1 invariant, then the geometry of a 
figure l/>2 with respect to ®2 is identical with the geometry of the set of figures ( lP 1 , l/>2) 
with respect to ®1 . 
Let us illustrate the application of KLEIN's principle we intend to make by 
the following familiar example. Suppose we have given a tensor field /!.::: in 
ordinary 3-dimensional Euclidean metric space where ®2 is the orthogonal group, 
i.e., /':,.::: is a Cartesian tensor. Let ® 1 be the group of general analytic co-ordinate 
transformations in 3 dimensions. ®2 is a subgroup of ®1 • Let gkm(;x) be an 
absolute symmetric positive definite tensor fieldunder ®1 suchthat its Riemann 
curvature tensor vanishes. Then in the space with group ®1 we know that there 
exist preferred co-ordinate systems zk such that gkm (z) = 15km· Furthermore, 
any such pair of preferred co-ordinate systems are related to each other by an 
orthogonal transformation. Thus the group @2 can be defined as the subgroup 
of @1 which leaves the canonical form 15;; of the Euclidean metric field g;1 
invariant. Let e':n-::. (;x) be any field in the space with group ®1 having any law 
of transformation under ®1 such that 
e':n-::. (z) = t':n·::. (z) ( 152.6) 
in every preferred Co-ordinate system in which g;;= 15;1• According to KLEIN's 
principle, the theory of the invariants of the field f':n·::. under the group @2 is 
identical with the theory of the joint invariants of the fields (e':n-:: .• gpq) under the 
group @1 of general analytic transformations or under any group containing @2 
as a subgroup. 
With these ideas in mind, consider the group @~ of general analytic transformations of the four Co-ordinates xr of events. Our objective is to define two 
sets of fields {lf>}G: and {lf>}ili having assigned transformation laws under @~ 
such that (1) there exists a subdass of preferred co-ordinates zr in which the 
fields { lf>}o; and { lf>}o; assume certain canonical forms, and (2) the subgroups @G: 
and ®m consist in all the transformations of @~ which leave invariant the canonical forms of the sets of fields {lf>}lt and {lf>}<r,, respectively. Once we determine 
such a set of fields, we invoke KLEIN's principle and give new but equivalent 
definitions of Euclidean and Galilean kinematics. That is, the study of the 
invariants of a motion under the restricted groups ®o; and @<D can then be replaced by the equivalent theory of the joint invariants of the combined sets of 
fields (ZK(xr), {lf>}~) and (ZK(xr), {lf>}<Ii) under the group ®il· 
Case I. Euclidean space-time. Let tr(;x) $0 be an absolute covariant 
vector field under @~ such that 
(152.7) 
Let grA (;x) be a symmetric contravariant singularabsolute tensor fieldunder @~ 
suchthat 
grAtA =0, gr11 VrVA >0, (152.8) 
for all Vr$ 0 and not parallel to t11 • The condition (152.7) is necessary and sufficient for the existence of an absolute scalar field t (;x) such that 
(152.9) 
The field t (;x) is uniquely determined to within an additive constant. Let us 
introduce t(;x) as a co-ordinate surface by setting z4=t and impose on the non1 ScHaUTEN [1954, 21, p. 65]. 
Sect. 152. World invariant kinematics. 455 
vanishing components gkm (xP1 z4) in such a system of co-ordinates the conditions 
(152.10) 
These conditions are necessary and sufficient that we be able to make a further 
transformation 
zk=zk(xP1 z4) 
of the first three co-ordinates such that in the co-ordinate system zr the fields 
gr-1 and tr have the canonical form 
= [c5rs 0] g 0 0 I t = (01 01 01 1). (152.11) 
Applying the assumed tensor law of transformation to these canonical formsl we 
then see that the Euclidean group of transformations (152.1) is the subgroup of ~~ 
which leaves these canonical forms invariant. 
Thereforel Euclidean kinematics is the theory of the joint invariants under the 
group ~~ of the set of fields 
ZK(;x) 1 grL1(:x) 1 tr(:X) 1 (152.12) 
-1 
where the definition (152.3) of Cl invariant under ~<E~ is replaced by the definition 
. (152.13) 
invariant under ~~. 
A co-ordinate system in Euclidean space-time suchthat (152.11) holds will 
be called a Euclidean frame. Weshall call gn the space metric; weshall call tr 
the covariant space normal; and we identify t with the time. 
Case II. Galilean space-time. Let F~ (:x) be a symmetric affine connection 
under ~~~· We assume that r is a flat or integrable connection so that 
(152.14) 
Let gr-1 and tr be tensors under ~~ having the same properties assigned to these 
fields as in Case I above1 but which in addition satisfy the conditions 
feg<~>-1 =Oe g'~>Ll +F:fA gALl + FrfAg<~>A = 0 1 ) 
17,1 t'l> = 8,1 t'l> - r~ te = 0' r 
(152.15) 
jointly with the connection r<~>~. That isl the covariant derivatives of g<~>-1 and 
tr based on the connection rctt vanish identically. 
From (152.14) follows the existence of preferred co-ordinate systems in which 
all of the components of the connection vanish1 . Any two such systems are 
related by a linear transformation. It follows from (152.15) thatl in any of the 
co-ordinate systems in which the connection vanishes 1 the components of gn 
and tn are constants. Set z4 = t(:x). This will be a linear transformation leaving 
the connection zerol and t will assume its canonical form 
t = (01 01 01 1). (152.16) 
From (152.8) it follows that gr-1 is reduced to the form 
= [gkm 0] g 0 0 I (152.17) 
1 EISENHART [1927, 4, § 29). 
456 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 153. 
where gkm is a constant symmetric positive definite matrix. Thus by a further 
linear transformation of the first three co-ordinates not involving z4, preserving 
the condition ( 15 2.16) and the vanishing of the connection, we can reduce g 
to its canonical form (152.11h. It is then an easy matter to verify that the 
Galilean group ( 152.2) is the subgroup of ~lt which leaves invariant the canonical 
forms (152.11) and rtJ~ =0. 
Therefore, Galilean kinematics is the theory of the joint invariants under ~~ of 
the set of fields 
(152.18) 
where the zx again satisfy the invariant condition (152.15). The preferred Coordinate systems in Galilean space-time in which we have (152.11) and F~=O 
will be called Galilean frames, and r;tJ will be called the Galilean connection. 
Galilean frames may be identified with the inertial frames of classical mechanics 
(cf. Sect. 196). 
Thus we have succeeded in formulating Euclidean and Galilean kinematics 
as theories of the joint invariants of a motion and a suitable set of fields under 
the group ~~~ of unrestricted general transformations of the co-ordinates in spacetime. Quantities transforming as a tensor under ~~will be called world tensors. 
An affine connection under ~~ will be called a world alfine connection. The 
Galilean connection is a world affine connection, grtJ and tr are world tensors, 
and the zx (~) are world scalars. 
Weshall also consider the theory of the joint invariants of an arbitrary world 
tensor field 'P.f::: and a motion as part of the subject matter of kinematics. In 
regard to this aspect of the theory, we shall be especially interested in quantities 
like the stress tensor tkm of mechanics (cf. Sect. 203) which are required to transform as the components of a 3-dimensional Cartesian tensor under the restricted 
group ~a:· We shall represent quantities of this type in the 4-dimensional 
formalism by contravariant world tensors tprtJ. · · which satisfy the invariant 
conditions 
(152.19) 
Contravariant world tensors satisfying (152.19) will be called space tensors. We 
easily verify that, in every Euclidean or Galilean frame, each component of a 
space tensor with any index equal to 4 vanishes, and the non-vanishing components have the transformation law 
ljlk'l' = Ak'kAI'z ... tpkl, (152.20) 
under the restricted groups ~lt and ~(fj. Thus, according to KLEIN's principle, 
the theory of the joint invariants of tpii and a motion under the restricted groups ~(f 
and ~()) is equivalent to the theory of the joint invariants of tprtJ and the lists of 
fields (152.14) and (152.18), respectively. 
153. World invariant Euclidean kinematics. In this section we consider 
certain of the invariants of a motion in Euclidean space-time. As previously 
mentioned, since ~Gi is a subgroup of ~a:, any invariant of a motion in Euclidean 
space-time is also an invariant of a motion in Galilean space-time, so that all 
of the results and considerations of this section apply equally well to motions in 
Galilean space-time. 
IT.) W orld velocity field of a motion. Consider the world scalar of weight 1 
defined by 
(153.1) 
Sect. 153. World invariant Euclidean kinematics. 
and the world vector of weight 1 defined by 
br = _!___ eAA.z:r 8 ZK 8 ZL 8 ZM e - 3! LI A l: KLM• (153.2) 
In a Euclidean frame, ~ = det ok ZK = ± Vde;6 =F 0. Since the law of transformation for ~ is ~*=Jx*fxJ- ~ and Jx*fxl is never zero, ~=f=O in any coordinate system. Thus we can define the absolute world contravariant vector 
field 
(153.3) 
called the world velocity vector of the motion. The form which any world tensor 
or other type of world invariant takes in every Euclidean or Galilean frame will 
be called its canonical form. The canonical form of the world velocity vector vr is 
(153.4) 
Since ~ is never zero, we can always solve for any system of general co-ordinates 
xr in terms of the material co-ordinates ZK and the time T=t(x). Thus we 
always have relations of the form 
xr=xr(zK,T). (153.5) 
In terms of these relations, we have 
The result (153.5) serves to promote the geometric interpretation of a motion as 
a congruence of lines in space-time which are nowhere tangent to the surfaces 
t (x) = T = const. Such a surface is called an instantaneous space. The material 
co-ordinates ZK serve as names for the lines of the congruence, and T is an 
admissible parameter whose value is never stationary as one moves along a line 
of the congruence. It is clear that the first three components of the world velocity 
in a Euclidean frame coincide with the usual definition (67.1) of the velocity 
vector of a continuous medium. 
ß) Invariant definition of a rigid motion. A motion in Euclidean or Galilean 
space-time is called rigid if and only if 
(153.7) 
To see that this definition corresponds to the customary one, note that from 
(153.1) and the fact that ~ =f= 0, we can always introduce the ZK and T= t(x) 
as a system of co-ordinates in space-time. The components of the space metric 
g in such a system of convected co-ordinates will have the values gK4=g44=0 
and gKL where -1 
gKL = CKL (convected co-ordinates). (153.8) -1 
The result ( 15 3 .8) follows immediately from the definition of the CKL in a general 
system of co-ordinates. Let gKL (ZK, T) denote the inverse of gKL. The distance 
between two neighboring material points ZK and ZK + dZK at time T is given by 
d52 = gKLdZK dZL= CKLdZK dZL. (153.9) 
Thus a motion is rigid if and only if dS = 0 for every pair of neighboring material 
points. 
458 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 153. 
y) W orld tensor of stretching. Consider the contravariant absolute world 
tensor 11 defined by1 
V (153.10) 
.1rx = _ -i 1: grx, } 
=-t (vAoAgr.E- gAL'(JA vr- gAT(JA vX), 
where i: denotes the Lie derivative (150.6) with respect to the world velocity V 
vector vr. One sees by inspection that the Lie derivative of any space tensor 
is a space tensor. The canonical form of the space tensor 11 is 
= [dkm O] 11 0 0. (153.11) 
The quantities dkm are the familiar Cartesian components of the stretching tensor 
(82.2). We call 11 the world tensor of stretching. 
The field g-1 defined by 
(153.12) 
is a world scalar of weight - 2 having the constant value g-1 = 1 in every 
Euclidean frame. The familiar absolute scalar invariants of the stretching tensor 
dkm are given in world invariant form by the formulae 
I _ g 'PD AII ATL' S ~ 
d-28T'l'AB8L'!JII~g g LJ. V V 'J 
II - g 'PD L1AII L1TL' vE ~ d-2f8T'l'AB8L'DII~g V, 
IIId = L, Br'l'AB BxDII~ L1'l'D L1AII L1rx v3 v~. 3· 
(153.13) 
The canonical form of these scalars (cf. Sect. 83) is 
Comparing the definitions of the Lie derivative with respect to vr of a world 
space tensor and the convected time flux ( 150.5) of a Cartesian tensor under 49~t, 
we see that .. d ~i; ... f: '*' •1· •• == _.::_C -;-:--
V dt 1 (153.15) 
where, as henceforth, the symbol"-'-" indicates that equality holds in a Euclidean 
frame and, in general, only in such a frame. 
From this result and from (150.6) we seethat in thespatialdescription, where the velocity 
field is basic and is regarded as given, the convected time flux ~fdt defines an infinitesimal 
transformation of ~- As was remarked by ZoRAWSKI 2, the central problern of the kinematics 
of the spatial description is to characterize all invariants of this infinitesimal transformation. 
~) W orld alfine connections defined by a motion. The structure of Euclidean 
space-time implied by the underlying group 49~t of Euclidean transformations 
does not of itself lead to an affinely connected space in the tour-dimensional 
sense as in the case of the linear Galilean group. However, as was shown by 
DEFRISE 3, given the basic tensors gsx and ts of Euclidean space-time and a 
1 WUNDHEILER [1932, 15, § 8]. 1 The analysis of ZoRAWSKI [1900, 11 and 12] [1911, 13 and 14] [1912, 8] refers only to 
steady motion described in the common frame. 3 [1953. 8]. 
Sect. 153. World invariant Euclidean kinematics. 459 
world velocity vector v5 , we can construct from these quantities and their partial 
derivatives a set of quantities .Q~!P having the law of transformation of a world 
affine connection under ~~. The method of constructing the components of 
.Qf:!P from the g5 I, t8 , and v5 is analogous to the method of constructing the 
Christoffel symbols based on a non-singular symmetric absolute tensor of rank 
two, familiar in Riemannian geometry. Let 17 !P denote covariant differentiation 
D 
based on the world affine connection .Q~I· The equations used by DEFRISE to 
determine the components .Q~ x are equivalent to the following: 
(153.16) 
These equations have a unique solution for all64 components of the world connection .Q~I· The canonical form of these quantities is 
. av• . . .Q'« = - iiZ' + v' 8; v•. (153.17) 
As a variant of DEFRISE's procedure for determining a world affine connection 
in terms of a motion in Euclidean space-time, we can solve the equations 
17 !P gBI = 0, vii7x v5 = 0, 17x ts = 0, 17 !P v!B gil!P = 0, (153.18) 
A A A A 
for the components A~x of a different symmetric world affine connection. The 
canonical forms of the components of the connection A~x are 
Afk=O, Ab=O, Ats=(wPs-dPs)vs-~~· (153.19) 
where wP s == t ( 8 s vP - 8 P vs) are the components of vorticity. 
It is an immediate consequence of the law of transformation for affine connections that the difference between two affine Connections is an absolute tensor. 
In the case of the two world affine connections .Q~x and A~x. this difference 
turns out to be 
Uffx== A~x- D~x = Ps!PiJ!PIItx + Px!PiJ!PII ts, 
where Ps• is the absolute tensor which has the canonical form 
p = [ ~k;m vP::] · 
(153.20) 
(153.21) 
e) Invariant time fluxes in the 4-dimensional formalism. We now note an interesting relation between the covariant derivatives of world space tensors based 
on the two connections .Q~x and A~x and the two invariant time fluxes dJdt 
and drfdt defined in Sects. 150 and 148. Let psx ... be a space tensor, and 
consider the space tensors given by 
v!P17!PlJISI ... and V!P17!PlJISI.... (153.22) 
n A 
As one easily verifies from the canonical forms ( 15 3 .17) and ( 15 3 .19), in a Euclidean 
frame we have 
I Tl':' • dc ITJ:" -" lTF' • dr lTJ:" v!P !{ !P r•t ... = dt r•l .. ·, V"' f!P r•l· .. = dt r•t .... (153.23) 
In an arbitrary system of space-time co-ordinates we have 
v!P 17.lJIBI ... - v!P 17(P lJISI... = v!P U/rrlJIIII ... + v!P U/rrlJISII ... + ... (153.24) 
A n 
460 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 153 
which generalizes the relation (151.1} contrasting· theinvariant time fluxes dcfdt 
and drfdt. 
If one adds any symmetric absolute tensor S!/x=S~s to the world affine 
connection determined by either of the sets of Eqs. (15).16) or (153.18}, one obtains 
yet another symmetric world affine connection. Many tensors S!/x can be defined 
in terms of the basic set gsx, t8 , and v5 • Thus, many world affine connections 
can be constructed from these quantities and their partial derivatives, and the 
absolute derivatives of world tensors can be defined in terms of them. The 
question as to which of these methods of absolute differentiation in Euclidean 
space-time defined in terms of a motion in that space is the most natural or 
useful is analogous to that raised in Sect. 151 concerning invariant time fluxes. 
CJ Convected co-ordinates. In a convected system of co-ordinates x3= (ZK, T), 
the world velocity vector and the covariant space normal have the convected 
form 
V= (0, 0, 0,1}, t = (0, 0, 0,1), 
and, as noted previously, the space metric has the form 
_ [CKL ol Y- 0 0. 
(15).25) 
(153.26) 
Thus it is a simple matter to determine the convected form of the various world 
tensors L1 5 x, v<ll, tpsx, etc., which have been introduced. From (15).10) it 
follows immediately that, in a convected system of co-ordinates, 
[ 
1 fJgKL ] 
L1EX= ---20
ßT ~ • (15).27) 
The convected form of the Lie derivative of any space tensor is given by 
f: 1Jf4X ... = f: 1Jf.!i'4 ... = 0 V V 1 
tTIKL f)lpKL. '' 
~ r ... = fJT • (153.28) 
The convected forms of the world affine connections D!/x and A!/x are 
Df, = 0, DfM = {L~} , Dfrx = 0, .DfL = 0, I 
K c -1 (15).29) 
{ } acMK Af, = 0, AfA, = LM 0 , Ai-x = 0, AfL =- 2 CLM ----er, 
where {L~}c denotes the Christoffel symbols based on the CKL. In Sect. 150 
it was shown that the convected time flux of a )-dimensional tensor under ~<t 
reduces to awr(L .. 'foT in convected Co-ordinates. In fact, this was made the basis 
of its definition. It follows from (15).28) and (15).29) that the conditional 
equalities (15).15) and (153.23) holding in Euclidean frames may be extended 
to the case of convected co-ordinates. However, for the absolute derivative 
(15).22) 2 of a space tensor in convected co-ordinates we have 
v<J117!1> w'x ... = v<Z117<JI W3
A A "'· = 0, l 
KL fJWKL... 1 f)gMK NL 1 fJgML KN (15).30) v<Z~ ~ <JI W .. • = ar - 2 CMN ----er W - 2 CMN - 0T W - • • •• 
If the )-dimensional tensor components w•f .. · occurring in the definition (148.5) 
of the co-rotational time flux are transformed as the components of a contra-
Sect. 154. World invariant Galilean kinematics. 461 
variant tensor under the group of transformations (152.4) relating general curvilinear and deforming co-ordinates with the time held fixed, we can also extend 
the conditional equality (153.23h to these more general types of co-ordinate 
systems. In this case, (153-30) 3 is a formula for the components of the co-rotational 
time flux referred to a convected system of Co-ordinates. 
154. World invariant Galilean kinematics. In the case of Galilean kinematics, we study the invariants of the fields (152.18) and the joint invariants of a given world tensor psE. · · and these fields. In Galilean space-time, 
as opposed to Euclidean space-time, we have given a priori an integrable or 
flat world affine connection r:E with which to construct additional invariants 
of a motion and other fields defined in the space. 
rx) The world acceleration vector and the vorticity tensor. Let 17 s denote covariant 
r 
differentiation based on the Galilean connection r:E· Then in terms of the world 
velocity field of a motion in Galilean space-time, we define the absolute world 
acceleration vector 
(154.1) 
In a Galilean frame the acceleration vector has the canonical form 
(154.2) 
Thus the first three components of the acceleration vector in a Galilean frame 
are equal to the usual expressions (98.1) for the acceleration. Moreover, since a5 is 
a space tensor, they have the customary 3-dimensional vector law of transformation under ~o;. The world velocity gradients are defined by 17 s vE. Consider the 
r 
symmetric and skew-symmetric parts of the world tensor WEE defined by 
(154.3) 
These are given by 
w<sE) = LJEE, W[EE]=fJEE, (154.4) 
We have met with several invariant definitions of LJEE already, but QEE is a 
new tensor quantity having the canonical form 
= [-w'i 0] ,Q 0 0' (154.5) 
Since w'i is the classical vorticity tensor (86.1), we call Q the absolute world 
vorticity tensor. Now the world tensor of stretching A was defined independently 
of the Galilean connection, but this independence is not immediately apparent 
from (154.3) and (154.4). It may be seen from 
WIE E) = g'~ (E 8 ,z, vE) + g<Z>(E r:h vll' (154.6) 
since by (152.15h we have 
2g.z><s Flh=- 8rrg5 E. (154.7) 
The components of the world vorticity tensor .2 cannot in this same way be 
expressed solely in terms of the fields v, g, t and their derivatives. That is, 
vorticity is not a Euclidean invariant of a motion. This is clear from an intuitive 
point of view since vorticity measures a rate of rotation, which does not have 
an absolute significance under the Euclidean group but does have an absolute 
significance under the smaller Galilean group. 
462 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 154. 
ß) Curvilinear, rotating, and deforming co-ordinate systems. Consider the class 
of co-ordinate systems related to a Galilean frame by a co-ordinate transformation 
of the general form, 
xk' = xk' (z', z4), x 4' = z4 + const. ( 154.8) 
In general, the co-ordinate system xk' will be curvilinear, rotating, accelerated 
and deforming. The tensors g and t in such a system of co-ordinates will have 
the general form 
g X , X 0 [ k'm' ( n' 4') J 
g= 0 0 ' t = (0, 0, 0, 1). (154.9) 
The components of the Galilean connection r can be written in the form 
r.k' { k' } m'n'= ' ' , m n g 
k' - ()uk' { k' } n'- k' rm'4'-- """- ' ' u =-u m'• uX m n g • (154.10) 
TTk' ()uk' k' m' .L4'4' =- ox4' +u ,m'u ' 
where {r:' t are the ChristoHel symbols based on the gk'm' and uk' is the velocity 
of a fixed point in the Galilean frame z relative to the deforming co-ordinate 
system ~·. The uk' are defined in terms of the co-ordinate transformation ( 154.8) by 
k'- oxk' 
U = ()z4 . 
If the transformation ( 154.8) has the Euclidean form ( 143.11), then 
u: =EA~~ .. -~ ~A~::::~· i) I ' m' A b. =Wk'm'X - kk' k· 
(154.11) 
(154.12) 
The components of r in this rotating and accelerated Cartesian frame have the 
values 
r:,:,.. = o, FJ·x·= o, r,::: 4• =-w;.'m'• } 
TTk' ( • ' ' ' ) n' A 'b' 1 4!4' = - Wk'n' +wk'm'Wm'n' X + kk' k· 
(154.13) 
The components of the acceleration vector in a general rotating, accelerating 
and deforming co-ordinate system are obtained simply by substituting the components of the Galilean connection (154.10) into theinvariant definition (154.1). 
In this manner, we get 
a:. = 
0
;vk' k' ., ( ()uk' k' .,) k' • ., ) 
a = 0 x4.+v.rv1 - oz4, +u.iu' -2u,;(v'-u'). 
If the non-Galilean frame is Cartesian, so that (154.13) applies, the 
for ak' reduces to 
(154.14) 
expression 
k' ovk' ovk' , , . ( . , , ) • A b .. a = ox4 + oxm' vm- 2wk'm'Vm- OJk'm'- Wk'n'Wn'm' xm + kk' k• (154.15) 
a k' 
Since a5 is a space vector, we also have ak' = a:m am. Therefore, (154.15) is 
the formula of CoRIOLIS (143.6) expressed in component form, and (154.14) is 
Sect. 154. World invariant Galilean kinematics. 463 
a generalization of the Coriolis formula to the case of curvilinear and deforming 
co-ordinate systems. 
We pause toremarkthat the formulae (154.9) and (154.10) achieve in a fully 
general yet explicit form all that is attempted by older treatments of the subject, 
since in all those treatments1 the equations of transformation to the general, 
deforming co-ordinate system from a "fixed" reetangular Cartesian system are 
considered as given. 
In an arbitrary curvilinear and deforming co-ordinate system, we have (154.9) 
and (154.10), and the world tensor of stretching and world vorticity tensor 
assume the forms 
LJS'4' =!JS'4' = 0, l 
k'm' 
LJk' m' = dk' m' + rP: m'l ,.. = dk' m' _ _!__ !.1__ 4" g 2 oz' , nk' m' k' m' [k' m'] n' ::ur =W -u ,,.•g . 
(154.16) 
If the ~· frame is Cartesian, these formulae reduce to 
L1 k' m' = dk' m'' Qk' m' = wk' m'- ro' k' m', 
affording a new proof of ZoRAWSKr's theorem (144.3). Eq. (154.16) is the extension of ZoRAWSKI's formulae to the case of curvilinear and deforming co-ordinate 
systems. 
y) Invariant equations for the rate of change of stretching and spin. Let a superposed dot denote the world material derivative defined by 
(154.18) 
If W is a space tensor, so also is its material derivative, and in a Galilean 
frame we have 
lj!4S ... = lj!.E4 ••• = 0, • k owkm .•• lll m ••• =---+v"o wkm ...• 'f oz4 n 'f ' (154.19} 
thus the definition ( 154.18} affords an invariant generalization of (72.4). With 
this notation, we have a5=v5 • Consider the world material derivative of the 
tensor W defined in (154.3). Wehave 
w.rs = v(f> vE gi:tJ> = V(f>vS gi<t>_ Vnvsv<t> vll gZ<I> } 
r r r r (154.20) =V<~> a5 g.E<~>_ Vnv V<~> vli g.r<~>. r r r 
Let D5 .E and Q5 .E denote the symmetric and antisymmetric parts of the 
acceleration gradients 17 <t> a5 g.E<~>. Taking the symmetric and antisymmetric parts 
r 
of ( 154.20} then yields 
Li s .E = w<s .E) = ns 1:- 17 n v<s gz> <1> 17 (f> vll. l 
r r 
iJs .z: = ßrr.uJ = QS .z:- 17 n vrs g.El <~> 17 <~> vli. 
r r 
(154.21) 
The classical problern of finding the equation for the rate of change of vorticity 
in a rotating, deforming co-ordinate system is thus solved by introducing the 
expressions (154.9) and (154.10) into (154.21} 2 2• 
1 E.g., that of McVITTIE [1949. 18]. 
2 This equation generalizes one derived by McVITTIE [1949, 18, Eq. (6.8)] by different 
means. There is an extensive earlier literature devoted to special cases, mostly in meteorological contexts. 
464 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 155. 
111. Mass. 
a) Definition of mass. 
155. The meaning of mass. In classical mechanics, each body is assigned a 
mass, a positive real nurober expressing the quantity of matter in the body, according to the requirements: 
1. The mass of a whole body is the sum of the masses of its parts; 
2. The mass of a body never changes, no matter how that body is moved, accelerated, 
or deformed; 
). The mass of a body is not in general determined by its size. 
These requirements are translated into mathematical form as follows: 
1. M ass is a measure. 
2. M ass is invariant under motion. 
). Mass bears a physical dimension [MJ, independent of [L] and [T]. 
W e discuss these in reverse order. 
No. 3. The dimension of mass. This is the only property of mass that distinguishes it from other measures, such as the probability in phase of statistical 
mechanics or any other kind of probability or measure. While the dimensional 
independence of mass has definite and essential consequences in certain parts of 
mechanics, notably in the theory of modelling, for the developments presented 
in this treatise no use is made of it. 
No. 2. The conservation of mass. In classical mechanics, the quantity of 
matter in a body generally does not change, while in more recent physical theories 
there are laws governing the change of mass. These physical principles must 
not close our eyes to the simple fact that it is always possible to define an invariant 
measure. Indeed, let the motion in the interval of time from t0 to t be regarded 
as a transformation T/ which carries the particle X to the place ~ = Tl X, 
and the set of particles 'g> into the set of places d = 7;! .9'. From the axioU: of 
continuity of motion, if .9' is measurable then d is measurable. Assign any 
measure m ( .9') to the measurable sets of particles; then the definition 
!.TR(Il, t) = !m(7;!.9', t) = !.JR(.9') (155.1) 
induces a measure of sets of places, and this measure is invariant in time for a 
given set of particles. That is, the measure of the set of places occupied by the set 
of particles .9' is the same at each time. This trivial construction is valid in the 
greatest generality. For any sort of motion, whether or not a possible one for a 
body obeying the laws of classical mechanics, we may have conservation of mass 
by definition. 
When we assert that in classical mechanics mass is conserved but in relativistic mechanics 
it is not conserved, we mean that the foregoing construction is useful in classical mechanics, 
not useful or at least not appropriate in relativistic mechanics. The distinction is a physical 
one. In relativistic mechanics, it is equally possible to define an invariant mass, but such a 
mass does not enter simply into the dynamical equations of the theory and does not correspond to the physical idea of quantity of matter; it is not fit to be compared with the result 
of an experiment designed to measure quantity of matter. 
Even in classical mechanics there are cases when conservation of mass is not appropriate. 
The constituents of a mixture undergoing chemical reactions may lose or gain mass, though 
the mass of the mixture is constant. A formalism for such exchanges of mass will be presented 
in Sect. 158. Another example is furnished by the moticn of a burning body in a theory 
which does not take account of the motion of the combustion products. That in both these 
cases the apparent changes of mass result from confining attention to only a part of all the 
matter "really" present does not reduce their cogency as examples: Mechanics must be 
general enough to admit models for limited situations (cf. Sect. 6}. 
Sect. 155. The meaning of mass. 465 
An invariant measure is at our disposal: Conservation of mass results not 
from an axiom but from a definition, a definition we may wish to use, or may not. 
Kinematics is neither more nor less general after the introduction of mass. This 
subchapter presents topics in kinematics whose usefulness is connected with 
mass. It would be possible, though less interesting and less fruitful, to develop 
all this material without mentioning mass. 
No.l. Massas a measure. A positive, finite mass IDl(X) may be assigned to 
the particle X. In this case, the mathematical statement of Property 1 becomes 
1disc· The measure IDl (X) is discrete, 
and the particle X is called a mass-pointl. The mass of any finite number of 
mass points is finite, but the mass of an infinite nurober of Iike mass-points is 
always infinite. Therefore, if we are to represent finite physical bodies by a 
model consisting in an aggregate of mass-points having only finitely many 
different masses, only a finite number of mass-points may be used, and thus 
necessarily almost all of space is void of matter. 
In the model of matter as continuous, to which this treatise is devoted, finite 
mass is assigned not to individual particles but only to sets of particles having 
positive volume. Moreover, if we have an infinite decreasing sequence of bodies 
whose common part, if any, has no volume, the masses of this sequence of bodies 
must approach zero. In mathematical terms, 
1cont· The measure Wl(9") is an absolutely continuous function of volume. 
This requirement is more stringent than the physical motivation No. 1 suggests. 
The difficulty is typical of infinite models (cf. Sect. 4); it is just the same as a 
classical difficulty in the experiential foundation of probability theory; thus we 
pass over it here. The requirement of absolute continuity modifies No. 3 to this 
extent, that a body of zero volume has zero mass. 
Requirements 1disc and 1cont may be combined so as to permit mass-points 
and continuous masses simultaneously: 
1mixed. Let IDl ( 9") be the sum of an absolutely continuous measure and a discrete 
measure defined over a finite number of points. 
For application to particular cases, 1mixed may be the most convenient. More 
general definitions of mass are suggested by measure theory, but these do not 
seem useful in mechanics. According to the field viewpoint, indeed, 1mixed is 
unnecessarily general, since, as we shall see in Sect. 167, the concept of masspoint emerges derivatively in the theory of continuous bodies. 
Integration over mass. Since mass is a measure, a Lebesgue-Stieltjes integration may be defined over it. By the fundamental theorem on absolutely 
continuous measures, from 1mixed follows 
n 
JfdiDl=JefdV+L,IDlafa, (155.2) 
!/' -r a=l 
where la=f(Xa), where IDla is the mass assigned to Xa, and where (!, the mass 
density, satisfies 
dim e = [M L-a], (155-3) 
1 EuLER [1736, 1, §§ 98, 117, 134]. The concept of "body" used by NEWTON and other 
earlier authors was vague. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 30 
466 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 156. 
9.R (9') being the mass of the set 9' whose volume is ~ (9'). One way of asserting 
(155.2) is to write 
d9.R = e dV, (155.4) 
except at the points bearing discrete masses. 
By definition, (! is an absolute scalar under co-ordinate transformations, 
since dV, as defined in the line following (20.9), is the absolute scalar element of 
volume rather than the scalar capacity dX1 dX2 dX3• 
While the theory of measure is needed to justify rigorous deductions from 
(155.2), an equivalent idea was used regularly by EULER, LAGRANGE, and other 
savants of their time. In results based on (155.2), theorems for systems of mass 
points emerge by taking (! =0; for continuous media, by taking 9.Ra =0. We 
prefer to follow the latter course, adopting 1cont rather than 1mixed, and confining our attention to continuous bodies alone. Especially in view of the results 
to be presented in Sect. 167, this seems conceptually the cleanest course. However, the reader who desires to employ the mixed model may do so by trivial 
modification of the analysis in the following sections. 
The concept of body. Thus far we have used the term "material" to refer to 
any set of particles. We now introduce the term body to describe a set 9' of 
particles such that: 
1. 9' has positive mass. 
2. No subset of 9' which has positive volume has zero mass. 
This makes body synonymaus with portion of matter occupying a finite non-zero 
volume and suggests a model of the universe consisting in certain bodies moving 
through a massless aether. 
A finite portion of a body is itself a body, if its volume is positive. The requirement of absolute continuity asserts that a set of volume zero cannot be a 
body, but leaves it possible for an infinite volume to have finite mass, or for a 
finite volume to have infinite mass. In the former case, it is necessary that 
(! -+ 0 at oo except possibly on a set of points of volume 0; in the latter, that 
e-+ oo at one or more points. It is also possible that (! = 0 over a set of volume 
zero within a body. Points where (!-+ oo usually require special attention for 
other reasons, so we classify them as singularities and strengthen the axiom of 
continuity (Sect. 65) so as to exclude them: 
o~e<oo. (155.5) 
Points where e = 0 occasion no difficulty. 
From this additional requirement it results that every finite body has finite 
mass. 
For one-dimensional and two-dimensional systems, the arc density cx and the surface 
density a of invariant measures have the dimensions [ML-1] and [ML-2], respectively, and 
( 1 55.4) is to be replaced by 
d'.m=cxdX or d'.m=adA. (155.6) 
156. Equations expressing conservation of mass. The foregoing section has 
made it clear that conservation of mass is no more than a definition. Adopting 
the field viewpoint as expressed in the requirement 1cont• we may say that an 
initial density eo (X) is assigned as an arbitrary integrable function of X at time t0• 
The requirement of conservation of mass then determines the density (!(X, t) 
associated with the particle X at time t. By ( 15 5 .4), therefore, 
edv = e0 dV. (156.1) 
Sect. 156. Equations expressing conservation of mass. 
By (20.9) follow forms of the material equation of continuity1 : 
(! f = (!o, (! = (!o 1 · 
467 
( 156.2) 
All four symbols occuring in these formulae are absolute scalars under transformations of spatial or material co-ordinates. Other material forms of the equation 
of continuity may be obtained by eliminating J or i between ( 156.2) and various 
other relations derived in Subchapter I. 
From (156.2) it follows that in a continuous motion the density e(X, t) of the 
particle X is either always zero, always finite and positive, or always infinite. 
The specific volume v is defined by 
1 
V---· 
(! 
Equivalent to (156.1) and (156.2) are 
dvjdV = vjv0 , VJ = v0 , v = v0 ]. 
(156.3) 
( 156.4) 
In an isochoric motion, e = eo: The density of each particle remains constant 
throughout the motion. A homochoric motion, defined by eo = const, is an isochoric motion in which the density remains uniform in space and time. 
Since eo=e0 (X), we may set B=eo in (76.11) and by (156.2) 2 obtain the 
spatial continuity equation of D'ALEMBERT and EuLER2 in the forms 
oe ( · k) 'fi(+ex,k=O, etc. (156.5) 
From analysis given in Sect. 77 it follows that in any steady motion, it is possible 
to assign a density e suchthat oefot =0. This motivates the term steady motion 
with steady density, already introduced. For such a density, (156.5) 1 becomes 
(exk) k = 0, or div (e p) = o. ( 156.6) 
In general, the vector ex is called the mass velocity or mass flow. According to 
the result established, in a steady motion with steady density the mass flow is 
solenoidal. For such motions a sequence of theorems may be read off from the 
results of Sects. App. 31 to App. 32. 
Two important identities are immediate consequences of the definition of (!· 
First, by setting B =eo in (99.18) we obtain 
(! xk = :t- (e _ik) + (e _ik_im) ,m' (156.7) 
a result which will be interpreted in Sect. 170. Second, since ( 156.1) implies 
e dv =0, foramaterial volume "Y we have 
:e J eFdv = J eFdv, :t J FdiJJl = J FdiJJl. ( 156.8) 
"'" "'" "'" "'" 
These simple formulae will be used frequently. 
1 EDLER [1762, 1] [1766, 1, §§ 6, 35] [1770, 1, §§ 123-129]. PIOLA [1836, 1, §V, Eq. 
158)] obtained the form 
(-(!__xkx) = o, 
eo ' ;k 
which follows from (156.2) and (18.1). 
2 D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, § 116] obtained the special case forsteady rotationally symmetric 
motion; the general equation is due to EDLER [1757. 2, §§ 16-17]. References for the isochoric special case were cited in Sect. 77. 
30* 
468 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 157. 
For one-dimensional and two-dimensional systems, the counterparts of ( 156.1) are 1 
~dx=~ dX, Gda=G0 dA; (156.9) 
by (82.5) and (82.11), the counterparts of (156.5) are 2 
log~ + d(n) = 0, log G + Id- d(n) = 0, (156.10) 
where for the former n is the unit tangent, for the latter, the unit normal. 
157. The general balance 3• Let e be the density of a not necessarily invariant 
mass, and let IV be any quantity. For a material volume "'', set 
:t f (!'V dv =- ~da·i['V]+ f es['V]dv. {157.1) 
1'" !7' 1'" 
This relation we call the ge:neral balance or general conservation law; 
i [IV] is the influx of IV through .!7, while s [IV J is the supply of IV within "''. 
The general balance may serve as a definition of any one of the three quantities 
iv, i [IV], or s [IV] in terms of the other two. 
Despite the tautologism of the general conservation law, it is useful because 
in many cases we have a priori knowledge of i or s, or we can derive special 
forms for these quantities from information about IV. Since we may always 
define appropriate i and s for any given IV, we may say that all quantities IV 
may be balanced, by definition. This usage is not conventional, but it should 
help to avoid current ambiguity of the term "conservation ", which sometimes 
refers to equations of the type {157.1), sometimes to the stricter cases defined 
below. 
From {157.1), {81.2)1 , and (App. 26.1) 2 follows 
f {e ~+IV((!+ e Id)} dv = f (- divi +es) dv. {157.2) 1'" "Y 
Since this holds for all sufficiently regular volumes "'', however small, a classical 
argument yields the differential form. of the general balance: In a region 
where ~, IV, e, (!, Id, div i, and s are continuous, 
{157.3) 
A corresponding formulae at a surface of discontinuity will be given in Sect. 193. 
Take W = 1 and i = o; then (157.3) becomes 
(157.4) 
This is the form of the equation of continuity appropriate when mass is being supplied at 
a rate s per unit mass in the interior'. 
Henceforth we restriet attention to the case when mass is conserved. By 
(156.5), {157.3) reduces to 
e ~ = - div i + (! s' (157.5) 
as follows also by applying ( 156.8) to ( 15 7.1). If IV is a tensor of any order, by 
the convention of Sect. App. 23 we obtain the tensor equation 
e ~::: =- i:::~k+ es:::. {157.6) 
1 ProLA [1825. 2, § 178] [1848, 2, ~~ 11-12]. 2 ProLA [1825, 2, §§ 202, 237] [1848, 2, ~ 15]. 3 Cf. e.g. PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. VII, § 2], GRAD [1952, 7, § 4]. 4 ARRIGHI [1933, 2]. 
Sect. 158. Kinematics of diffusion in a heterogeneaus medium. 469 
valid in all co-ordinate systems. Another form follows by use of ( 156. 5h: 
n s· · · = _i_ (n lj! · .. ) + (n lj! · .. _ik + i · · .k) • "" ··· at "" · · · "" ··· . . . ,k (157.7) 
Both from (157.1) and from (157.5) it is plain that for any given lj! we may 
take i =0 or s =0, as we please. This result may be called the equivalence of 
surjace and volume sources: To secure balance of lj!, it is sufficient to replace 
1. A ny influx i by a supply - e-1 div i, or 
2. A ny supply s by an influx i such that - div i =es. 
Given any s satisfying a Hölder condition, there are infinitely many i satisfying 
Requirement 2, such an i being indeterminate to within an arbitrary solenoidal 
field. (In cases when discontinuities of i or surface sources are present, this 
principle may fail. Cf. Sect. 193.) 
By the principle just established, it is always possible to define infinitely 
many fields i [W J in such a way thatl 
eW =- divi, or, if we prefer, -:t (eW) =- divi. (157.8) 
With any such a choice of i, we shall say that lj! is locally conserved 2 • 
Finally, when the total e lj! is invariant for a given material volume "Y, 
:t f eWdv =0, (157.9) 
'"Y 
we shall say that the total eW in "Y is conserved 3• This is consistent with our 
earlier statement that mass is conserved. In fact, in order that the total eW 
be conserved for every "Y, by (156.8) it is necessary and sufficient that W =0. 
The typical cases of conservation are not so universal, referring rather to bodies 
within boundaries of certain type or otherwise in special circumstances. 
In Chap. F we shall use a somewhat different definition of "conservation 
law", given in Sects. 269 to 270. 
158. Kinematics of diffusion in a heterogeneous medium. In order to treat 
motion of physical rnixtures possibly undergoing chemical changes, FICK and 
STEFAN 4 suggested that each place x may be regarded as occupied simultaneously 
by several different particles X'll, \}1=1, 2, ... , st', one for each constituent 1}1. 
The rnixture is thus represented as a superposition of st' continuous media, each 
of which follows its own individual motion 
xk = f~ (X'll, t) . (158.1) 
Henceforth media whose motion is described by ( 158.1) will be called heterogeneaus 
if sr > 1; if sr = 1' they will be called simple. 
For heterogeneaus media, German capital subscripts are used to distinguish 
quantities associated with the individual motions. The individual velocity x~1 is 
1 FERRARI [1913, 1, § 2]. 2 For the case W = f%2, WIEN [1892, 14] discussed the form taken by certain choices of i 
in certain particular field theories. Cf. also MATTIOLI [1914, 7]. 
3 The term "conservation law" is used in a different sense by ÜSBORN [1954, 17], who 
" restricts it to a formula of the type~ oakJoxk=o; he attacks the problern of determining 
k=l 
all such laws which follow from a given set of partial differential equations. 
4 [1855. 1]; [1871, 6]. Cf. HILBERT [1907, 3, PP· 43-47] [1907, 4, PP· 42-45]. REYNOLDS [1903, 15, § 35] employed a similar mathematical resolution of turbulent flow. 
470 
defined by 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
'k oxk I x~c=-- - ct X~=const • 
Sect. 158. 
(158.2) 
The spatial description of the motion consists in the S'r functional relations 
:V2l = :V~(;,:, t). Each constitutent has its individual density e~, the total density e 
being given by .R 
e = l: !?2l· (158.3) ~=1 
The absolute concentration1 c~1 of the constituent ~ is defined by 
c~== e~fe, (158.4) 
so that (158.3) is equivalent to 
.R 
LCU1=1. (158.5) ~=1 
The mean velocity ;E of the mixture is defined by the requirement that the 
total mass flow be the sum of the individual mass flows: 
.R .R 
e;E- L !?Ut:l:~r. or x = L c'1l:i:~ • (158.6) 
<Jl=1 <Jl=1 
The particles X of the mixture may be defined by integrating (70.2); such particles, in general, bear no simple relation to the particles XUI of the constitutents. 
The diffusion velocity or peculiar velocity of the constituent ~ is its velocity 
relative to the mean: 
u.n = :V<n- ;E. (158.7) 
By (158.6) follows .R .R 
l: e<nu.n=o, l: c~~u~=o. ( 158.8) 
<Jl=1 ~=1 
That is to say, the mean velocity has been defined in such a way that the total 
mass flow of the diffusive motions is zero. 
We now introduce two different material derivatives W and ~; the former, 
which coincides with that used for simple media, follows the mean motion, while 
the latter follows the individual motion of the constituent ~: 
. a.., "k , a'*' 'k W = Tt + W,kx, W = Tt + W,kx~. ( 158.9) 
Hence 
(158.10) 
so that the two derivatives coincide, in the case when W is a non-constant scalar, 
if and only if the diffusion velocity of the constituent ~ is tangent to the surface 
W =const. 
From (158.7) to (158.9) we derive the following identity: 
~ ~ ~ ["k oik 'k 'm] L. c~c um: = L. c~u~k x~- Tt -x,mx~, 
<Jl=1 <Jl=1 
.R 
= L cUt u~u [x~- i~m(im + u;i)], (158.11) ~=1 
.ll .R 
= L c~uux~- L cU!~u;idkm· '1!=1 <J1=1 
1 This usage is customary in works by physicists; chemists often call e~ the "concentration" and c~ the "mass fraction". 
Sect. 158. Kinematics of diffusion in a heterogeneaus medium. 471 
We set 
(158.13) 
and by summing (158.12) from m=l to m=~ obtain the followingjundamental identity1 : 
± c~ w~ = w + _!_ [ ~; + (eik),kl + _!__ ± (e~ 'l!~ut),k -1 ~~1 (! (! ~~1 .R (158.14) 
"~[oe~ +( .P) l· L.... e ot e~ ~ ·" ~~1 
Upon this identity, which relates the material derivative of the mean value 
(158.13) to the mean value of the material derivatives, are founded all our proofs 
of equations of balance in a heterogeneaus medium. 
In the foregoing analysis and in our later developments concerning heterogeneaus media 
we employ the definition (158.6), according to which the mean motion of the mixture is 
regarded as the velocity of the center of mass of the several constituents (cf. Sect. 165 below). 
This ,mean velocity ~ may be called the barycentric velocity. A more general mean velocity 
fi is defined by 2 
.R 
l: w~ 3:~ ~~1 
.R 
l;w~ 
~~1 
(158.15) 
where the weight factors w~ are any real numbers such that the denominator is not zero. 
The corresponding diffusion velocity is defined by 
(158.16) 
Formulae related to the motion of the constituents are generally more complicated when 
expressed in terms of (158.15) and (158.16) rather than :i: and u~l· For example, we have 
.R .R .R 
l: ü~g~k = ~.:Utg~k + (ik- i") l: g~". (158.17) ~~1 ~~1 ~~1 
Hence in order that 
.R .R 
l;u~g~"= l;u~g~"' (158.18) ~~1 ~~1 
j\ 
it is necessary and sufficient that l; Y'l! be orthogonal to ~ - fi; in particular, it is sufficient 
that 'll~1 
5\ 
l;g~=O. 
'll~1 
(158.19) 
The condition (158.19) is of interest in that it restricts the quantities g~, not the definition 
of ii, and in consequence holds for any fi. Moreover, if the g'll are given, ( 158.17) shows that 
1 TRUESDELL [1957. 16, § 3]. The readerwill recognize a certain analogy to MAXWELL's 
equation of transfer in the kinetic theory of gases. The present identity, however, is purely 
kinematical; not only does it embody no special hypotheses regarding the material, but also 
it is independent even of the general conservation principles of mechanics. 2 DE GROOT [1952, 3, §§ 47-48]. Cf. also PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. VII, § 3]. 
472 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 159. 
there are infinitely many definitions of mean velocity such that (158.18) holds, since all 
J\ 
that is necessary is to set ii: equal to the sum of :i: and any vector orthogonal to ~ 9'4· 
'4=1 
159. Conservation of mass in a heterogeneous medium. In the course of 
time, mass may be exchanged among the constituents, but the total mass is 
conserved. The formal structure expressing the balance of the several masses 
has been worked out by many authors1. The mass supply for the constituent $1! 
is the pure rate c9! defined by2 
A 8(!91 ( '") f!C9! = 8f + f!'4X9! ,k· (159.1) 
From (158.9) follows 
ec'D: = ec'D:- c'D: (eu:J,,., (159.2) 
These relations show that only diffusion or the creation of mass, not convection, 
can alter the concentrations at X or at Xvr. In an inert mixture, Eqs. ( 159.2) 
are satisfied by the vanishing of each term: c21=0, ~=0, andc'4=c21 (X). Thatis, 
each constituent flows with the same velocity, and the concentration of each 
constituent remains constant for each particle of the mean motion, and thus 
such a particle may be regarded as a perpetual union of fixed particles from 
each constituent. 
Returning to general motions, in (158.13) and (158.14) put \1! 91= 1. By (158.5) 
we thus obtain the identity 
J\ 
Be ( '") ~ A at+ f!X ,k=f!L!C'D:, '4~1 
(159.3) 
whence we read off the following theorem: In order that the mean motion of a 
heterogeneous medium obey the ordinary equation of continuity (156.5)t, it is necessary and sufficient that 
(159.4) 
The condition ( 159.4) asserts that the total mass supply is zero. Thus the ordinary 
equation of continuity and ( 159.4) are equivalent Statements of the conservation 
of total mass in the mixture. 
When we adopt (159.4), as we do henceforth, we may use it and (159.1) to 
reduce the fundamental identity (158.14) to the following simpler form: 
J\ J\ J\ 
l:c'D:WQt=W+__!__ l:<e'4\I!'D:~).,.- L c91\I!'D:· (159.5) 
V1=1 (! Vl=1 'D:-1 
Putting \I!'D:=x~ in {159.5). from {158.6) we derive the relation 
(159.6) 
connecting the acceleration of the mean motion with the mean of the individual 
accelerations. That nothing simpler than (159.6) is to be expected follows from 
the remark put after (158.6). 
1 JAUMANN [1911, 7, §§I, VIII], LOHR [1917, 5, §§ 5. 7-8, 12, 15] MEISSNER [1938. 
7, § Ill], BATEMAN (1939, 1], ECKART (1940, 8, p. 271] MEIXNER (1941, 2, § 3), VERSCHAFFELT [1942, 13, §§ 12-14] [1942, 14, §§ 4- 5] [1951, 38, §§ 7-13]. We follow the argument 
as arranged by TRUESDELL (1957, 16, § 4). 
2 REYNOLDS [1903, 15, §§ 13, 21, 36], JAUMANN [1911, 7, §§IV, VIII], HEUN [1913, 4, 
§ 24c]. 
Sect.159A. Appendix. Chemical interpretation for the balance of mass. 473 
159A. Appendix. Chemical interpretation for the balance of mass in a heterogeneaus 
medium1• For definiteness, we shall employ freely the terms atomic and compound. These 
names, however, serve only as a conceptual guide, and are not to be confused with the units 
occurring in discrete models of matter. For us, atomic will denote a constituent whose mass 
is indestructible; compound, a constituent whose mass may vary with circumstances and is 
the sum of masses of constituents whose mass is permanent. The formal structure we present 
is easily adapted to a great variety of different physical situations: to chemical reactions in 
which atoms unite to form molecules, to the dissociation of a pure substance into ions variously distinguished-in short, to any phenomenon governed by simple laws of combination 
and Separation. 
Of the ~ constituents, Iet the first \ß be atomic; the remainder, compound. Then the 
atomic weights and molecular weights M ~ satisfy 
'll 
M~ = l.: n~ 18 M !8• 
!8=1 
~ = \ß + 1, \ß + 2, 0 ••• ~. (159A.1) 
where, in the strictly chemical interpretation, n~!B is a non-negative integer expressing the 
number of atoms of the atomic substance 18 in one molecule of the compound ~- In the 
formal analysis, no use is made of this restriction, which may be dropped for more general 
interpretations. If we set n~!B == 15m!B when ~::;;; \ß, while n~l!B == 0 when 18 > \ß, we may 
replace (159A.1) by 
~ = 1, 2, ...• ~-
The indestructibility of the atomic substances is expressed by the postulate 
.!\ 
(159A.2) 
Ln~18 c~/M~ = o. (159A.3) ~=1 
c~ being defined by (159.1). If we multiply this relation by M 18 and sum on 18, by (159A.2) 
we derive (159.4). which we have already seentobe equivalent to the conservation of total 
mass. 
The postulate (159A.3) implies a pregnant identity connecting an arbitrary function g~ 
to g~. the difference between g'lt and its equivalent in atomic substances: 
.!\ 
• '\' M!B g~== g~- LJ n~!B --g!B• lB=1 M~ (159A.4) 
implying that g~r= 0 for ~::;;\ß. Then from (159A.3) follows 
.!\ .!\ 
Lt~g~ = L c~g~. m=1 m=\1!+1 (159A.5) 
This identity asserts that the total rate of production of the quantities gm through creation 
of mass equals the total rate of production of the quantities g~1 for the compound substances 
only. The case g~= 1 again yields (159.4). 
In the study of chemical reactions, it is customary to divide the mass supply cm of the 
constituent ~ into portions contributed by the f reactions taking place 2 : 
r 
ecm= l.: N~ala• (159A.6) a=1 
where fa is the reaction rate of the a-th reaction, and where the pure numbers N~a may 
be called stoechiometric coefticients. The reaction rates are assumed to be variable independ1 Not attempting to trace the origin of the ideas used herein the early chemicalliterature, 
we follow EcKART [1940, 8]. In a celebrated work which has given rise to the enormous 
Iiterature on the phenomenological theory of molecular relaxation, EINSTEIN [1920, 1] applied 
this structure to study reaction rates in a chemically pure gas, some of whose molecules are 
dissociated. Unfortunately the loose language in many of the more recent studies of relaxation 
phenomena might mislead the unwary reader into regarding the analysis as belanging to the 
kinetic theory, while in fact almost all of it employs field concepts, even if not very accurately. 2 DE DoNDER [1927, 3, pp. 10-11] [1938. 3]. The reaction rates are often written in 
the form ]a = d~afdt, where ~a is called "the degree of advancement" of the a-th reaction. 
RAw and YOURGRAU [1956, 18] propose to call dfafdt the "acceleration" of the a-th reaction. 
474 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 160,161. 
ently. Hence the condition (159.4) for conservation of total mass in the mixture becomes 
.ll 
L N'llo. = o, a = 1, 2, ... , f. (159A.7) 'll=l 
If we replace (159.4) by the stronger condition (159A.3), then (159A.7) in turn is tobe 
replaced by 
.ll 
L n'll!BN'llo.fMo.= 0, 
'll=l 
n = 1, 2, ... , L 
b) Solution of the equation of continuity. 
(159A.8) 
160. The need for a solution of the equation of continuity. The spatial 
equation (156.5)1 is in effect the result of differentiating the material equation 
(156.1) with respect to time1 . Thus (156.1) is the general solution of the spatial 
equation of continuity 2• However, (156.1) is expressed within the material 
description, and in order to render it explicit we must know the motion. A 
spatial form, for application of which the motion itself need not be given, is 
preferable 3• 
161. Plane motion and related cases. We begin with the special case of an 
isochoric plane or pseudo-plane motion, defined by (139.5) or (139.6). Then (156.5) 2 
becomes 
(161.1) 
This equation is a necessary and sufficient condition that there exist a function 
Q(x, y, z, t) such that . oQ X=--oy, . oQ Y=ax· (161.2) 
Since dQ =y dx-i dy, the curves Q =const satisfy (70.4) and hence are stream 
lines. The function Q is D'Alembert's stream function 4• To interpret it, let x 
vary along a curve c in the x-y plane. The vector d Xn = - i d y + j d x is normal 
to c and oriented by the right-hand rule. Since dQ =y dx-i dy =X· dxn, it 
follows that for two points x 1 and x 2 lying in a simply connected region in the 
sameplane z = const, the difference Q(x1 , t)- Q(x2 , t) is the flow per unit height 
across any curve c connecting them5• The independence of the flow from the 
choice of the curve c is a statement that the motion is isochoric. 
The classical argument just given establishes the single-valuedness of the 
stream function Q in a simply connected region, but in fact the result holds 
in much greater generality6• All that is required is to show that the line integral ~2 ~2 J X · dxn, or J Xn d Xn, is independent of path for any pair of points x 1 , x 2 
1 A formal proof was given by LAGRANGE [1762, 3, § 51]. 2 A formal proof was given by EuLER [1770, 1, § 112]. 3 Most of the stream functions whose properties are presented in the following sections are 
included in the listing of KRZYWOBLOCKI [1958, 6]. Interpretations of the equation of continuity or of similar relations satisfied by the acceleration as equalities among certain areas 
or volumes have been constructed by PoMPEIU [1929, 7], VALCOVICI [1933, 12], J ACOB [1944, 
6, § 3], CARSTOIU [1944, 1] [1948, 4] [1954, 1, §§ 9-12], BILIMOVITCH [1948, 2] [1953, 1], 
and TRUESDELL [1950, 34]. 4 [1761, 1, § 12]. A moregenerat type of stream function for pseudo-plane motions had 
been introduced by EuLER [17 57, 3, § 62], but he did not note the Sj)ecially simple properties 
of Q. 
5 RANKINE [1864, 2, § 2]. 6 NoLL [1957, 12]. 
Sect. 161. Plane motion and related cases. 475 
interior to the motion. For this, it is sufficient that the boundary consist in a 
finite number of closed curves moving rigidly, and, in the case of an infinite region, 
that there be no flux out of the portion of the region of flow that lies within a sutficiently large circle. To prove this, we begin noting that the condition satisfied 
upon the finite boundaries is (69.1); since Vn is the normal component of the 
velocity of a rigid motion, we have ~ Vn dxn=O for each closed rigid bounding ( 
curve l. Let c be any simple circuit, not necessarily reducible, in the interior. 
Then the regions of flow interior and exterior to c are bounded by c and by a 
curve ~. finite or infinite, such that ~indXn=O. Since the condition of-isochoric motion is " 
0 = ~XndXn- ~XndXn, (161.3) 
e " it follows that 
(161.4) 
for all circuits c, whether reducible or not. Q.E.D. 
Fig. 21. MAXWELL's construction for stream lines. 
Any family of plane curves Q(x, y, t) =const may be the stream lines of a 
plane isochoric motion. Given the stream function Q and Q* of two such motions, 
Q + Q* is thus also a stream function; if we sketch the stream lines Q = 0, ± 1, 
± 2, ... and Q* = 0, ± 1, ± 2, ... , in any system of units, stream lines corresponding to Q + Q* may be sketched approximately by connecting appropriate points 
of intersection of the two sets Q =const and Q*=const (Fig. 21)1. 
From (161.2) we have at once 2 
(161.5) 
where V2=o2fox2+o2foy2. Hence in an irrotational motion Qis a plane barmonie function a: 
(161.6) 
More generally, D'ALEMBERT's vorticity theorem (Sect. 133) asserts that a 
necessary and sufficient condition for a plane isochoric motion to be circulation 
preserving is that w be constant for each particle. From (161.5) we see that an 
equivalent statement is' 
V2Q = O; (161.7) 
1 According to RANKINE [1864, 2, Appendix], this Observation is due to MAXWELL. 2 This was implied by D'ALEMBERT [1761, 1, § 12]. 3 D' ALEMBERT [ 1768, 1, § II, ~ 7]. 
' This result has been misinterpreted by MEISSEL [1855, 3]. 
476 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 161. 
in the steady case, w is constant on each strearn line, and equivalent forrns of 
(161.7) are1 
o(I72Q, Q) - o 
o(x,y) - · (161.8) 
N ow we seek a necessary and sufficient condition that a given family of curves 
F(x, y) = const be possible stream lines of a steady plane isochoric circulation 
preserving motion. First, this is equivalent to the existence of a function Q that 
satisfies (161.8) 2 and also has the property Q = Q(F). That is 
Q"(F) o(F, jgradFj2) + Q'(F) o(F, V2F) = O. (161.9) 
o(x, y) o(x, y) 
Now Q"/Q' is a function of F; hence it is constant on each strearn line. For such 
a Q to exist, then, it is necessary and sufficient that 
o(F, J72F) ;o(F,jgradFj2) = G(F). 
o(x, y) o(x, y) (161.10) 
This criterion is due to STOKES 2• For the irrotational special case, (161.10) is 
to be replaced by 
J72Ff!gradFi 2 = G(F). (161.11) 
The condition (161.8) results from elimination of w from (161.5) by means of the condition of steady plane circulation preserving motion. As was noticed by HILL3 we may 
instead eliminate Q, even in the unsteady case. The condition Ül= 0 may be written 
(161.12) 
If w = w (x, y, t) is known, this isalinear partial differential equation for Q; its characteristics 
satisfy 
~ = ___!_]__ = _!CL . ow ow ow (161.13) 
8Y -8-x ot 
Therefore the characteristic curves are given by 
w (x, y, t) = const, Jow 
at Q- ow dx= const, 
oy 
(161.14) 
where in the second equation y is supposed eliminated by aid of the first. The general solution of (161.12) is 
or Jow 
at 
Q = ow dx + G(w, t). 
oy 
1 LAGRANGE [1783, 1, § 21], STOKES [1842, 4]. 2 [1842, 4]. 
3 [1885, 2, §I]. 
(161.15) 
(161.16) 
Sect. 162. Stream functions for two-dimensional motions. 477 
Substitution in (161.5) yields &•[f i~ 4x +G(w,~]- w, (161.17} 
a differential functional equation for w alone. 
Fora steady plane motion with steady density, (156.5}1 becomes 
aax (ei) + aay (ey) =O. (161.18) 
Hence there exists a function Q' such thatl 
• oQ' 
ex=-a-y· (161.19) 
The interpretation of Q' as a measure of mass flow is immediate from the interpretation of Q as a measure of flow. Q' is related to the vorticity through the 
equation 
(161.20) 
Neither Q nor Q' is a generalization of the other. In a steady plane homochoric motion, both Q and Q' exist, and Q'=eQ. However, in a steady plane 
motion in which the density is not uniform, while both Q' and Q exist, they 
may be related by an arbitrary functional relation F(Q, Q') =0. For example, 
in a motion such that x= V =const, y=O, e =e(y), we have Q =-Vy, 
'Y 
Q'=- V f e(u) du. 0 
For pseudo-lineal motions, defined by (1)9.2) and (1j9.j), the continuity 
equation (156.5)1 becomes 
0(! 0 ( ') ae+a; ex =0. 
Hence there exists a function Q such that 2 
oQ 
e=--ax· 
(161.21) 
(161.22) 
162. Stream functions for two-dimensional motions. The equation of continuity (156.5) may be written in the explicit forms 
(162.1) 
These suggest various extensions of the results given in the foregoing section. 
In the isochoric case and in the case of steady motion with steady density, 
respectively, suppose 
~a-(Vgi ) =O, a:a (ygei3) =O. (162.2) 
1 CRocco [1936, 3]. We do not follow the analysis of BIRKELAND [1916, 1], who claims 
to derive a result of the form (161.2) even when the expansion is not zero. 
2 W. KIRCHHOFF [1930, 2]. An equivalent result had been given by EuLER [1757, 3, 
§§ 48-49]. 
478 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 162. 
These conditions are necessary and sufficient for the existence of stream functions Q(xl, xs, xa, t) and Q'(x1, x2, x2, t) such that 
V- "1 oQ vg- i2 = oQ • lla "1- oQ' lla "2- oQ' (162.)} g X = - ox2 ' oxl ' f6 (!X - - ox2 ' f6 (!X - ();~1 ' 
respectively1• The factor yg in general depends upon x3 as well well as on x1 
and x2• In the special case when Q or Q' does not depend upon x3, knowledge 
of the motion in any one surface x2 = const suffices for construction of the motion 
in any other surface x3=const, since the factor Vg is specified by the choice of 
co-ordinates. In this case, let F =F(x1, x2, t), and we have by (162.)} 
-il'F =-1 o(F,Q) 1 o(F,Q') ( 6 ) 
,k Vi o(x1, x2) or e ]fg o(xl, x2) • 1 2.4 
Hence the curves F=const, x3=const are stream lines if and only if F=F(Q) 
or F =F(Q'), respectively. In particular, the curves x3=const, Q =const or 
Q'= const are stream lines. 
The simplest assumption leading to (162.2) is i 3=0. In this case, a particle 
once upon a given surface x3=const remains ever upon it. Such motions are 
strictly two-dimensional and may be approached alternatively as motions in a 
curved space of two dimensions. If the co-ordinates are chosen so that g 3 k = c5 3 k, 
then, since Vg w3=i2,1 -i1, 2 , we have, respectively, 
w3 = ,..kmQ 5 ,km (162.5) 
When the surfaces xll= const are parallel surfaces, the interpretation is particularly 
simple. For example, if they are concentric spheres of radius r, we may take x1, x2, x3 as 
the polar co-ordinates (J, cJl, r; then (162.3h and (162.3) 2 become 
. o. oQ rsm x(O) =---, 
ocJl 
• oQ 
rx(cf>) = ao· (162.6} 
where x(6) and x(cf>) are the physical components of velocity. This case was considered in 
detail by ZERMELO. 
In a rotationally symmetric motion (Sect. 68) the surfaces x3=const are planes, 
and we may take x1, x2, x3 as the cylindrical Co-ordinates r, z, 0. Then (162.))x 
and (162.)} 2 become 2 
. oQ . rr = ---oz ' 
• oQ 
rz=-· 01' ' 
an explicit form for (162.S)x in the rotationally symmetric case is 
aaQ 1 oQ aaQ ____ -- -- +- -= r 2 w3 = rw<a>. 
or2 r or oz2 
(162.7) 
(162.8} 
By SVANBERG's vorticity theorem (Sect. 133), it follows from (162.8) that a necessary 
and sufficient condition for a steady isochoric rotationally symmetric motion to be circulation 
preserving is that Q satisfy 
2' [Q] = _.!__ [!!_Q_- _.!._ ~ + 02Q l = /(Q); (162.9) r 2 or2 r or oz2 
1 In essence, we follow ZERMELO [1902, 10, Chap. I, §§ 2-4], who used the intrinsic twodimensional approach mentioned below. In this spirit ZERMELO obtained two-dimensional 
counterparts of some of the classical theorems on potential motion and circulation preserving 
motion. Cf. SBRANA [1934. 6]. 
2 STOKES [1842, 4]. Cf. BASSET [1888, 1, § 306], SAMPSON [1891, 5]. The results that 
follow by specialization of (162.3)3 and (162.3), in this case were noted by CRocco [1936, 3]. 
Formulae appropriate to a rotating cylindrical polar system were obtained by v. MISES 
[1909, 8, § 4.4]. 
Sect. 163. 
that is, 
Stream functions for certain three-dimensional motions. 
o(.ECQJ. Q) 
o(r,z) =0. 
If Q= Q(F), substitution into (162.10) yields 
Q' o (.E[F], F) + Q" o (J grad FJ2 ,.-2, F) 
o(r, z) o(r, z) =0. 
479 
(162.10) 
(162.11} 
Hence the curves F = const may be stream Iines of a steady isochoric rotationally symmetric 
circulation preserving motion if and only if 
o(F,.E[F]) I o(F,JgradFJ 2 r 2 ) =G(F) 
o(r, z) 0 (r, z) (162.12) 
along theml. 
163. Stream functions for certain three-dimensional motions. If the motion 
is isochoric or steady, the field p or the field e'Pis solenoidal; hence by (App. 32.7) 
and (App.32.9) we have in the former case 
p = C(A, B) gradA Xgrad B = curl v; 
in the latter 
e p = C' (A', B') gradA'xgrad B' = curl v'. 
(163 .1) 
(163.2) 
The reader may verify that all the foregoing results in this part of the subchapter 
except (161.22} are included as special cases of these four formulae 2• 
In EULER's representation (163.1}1 the potentials A and B may be selected 
as any independent functions such that the surfaces A = const and B = const 
are stream surfaces 3 ; a similar statement may be made about ( 163 .2)1 • By 
suitable parametrization of these surfaces, we may take C = 1. 
A kinematical interpretation analogous to that in Sect. 161 is then easily 
obtained4, for if ~ =~(v) is a parametric representation of a closed surface d, 
for the mass flux out of d we find from (163.2h 
~ e p · rl a = ~ (grad A' x grad B') . ( ;~ x ;~) rl v1 rl v2 , 
' f 
= J.. o(A', B') rl 1 rl 2 
'f o(vl,v2) V V' (163.3) 
= I dA' rlB'' f' 
where it is assumed that it is possible to select the area d' in a plane with coordinatesA', B' suchthat d'is mapped onto dbythetransformation A' =A'(~(v)), 
B' = B'(~(v)). Under these assumptions, then, we may decussate space into 
tubes bounded by the surfaces A' = 0, ± 1, ± 2, ... , B' = 0, ± 1, ± 2, ... , and 
the number of these unit tubes crossing d equals the mass flux out of d. 
The representations (163.1h and (163.2h are awkward to use because they 
are non-linear. While STOKEs's representations (163.1} 2 and (163.2) 2 are linear, 
the components of v have no simple kinematical interpretation. Thus each 
of the alternatives in (163.1) and (163.2) possesses one, but not both, of the 
properties which make the stream function of a plane motion convenient. 
1 STOKES [1842, 4]. Cf. also CLEBSCH [1857, 1, § 7). HILL [1885, 2, § II] gave analysis 
parallel to (161.12} to (161.17) for the rotationally symmetric case. 
2 Cf. ABRAHAM [1901, 1, § 7]. 3 A kinematical interpretation of A and Bis given by PRATELLI [1953, 24, § 5]. EuLER's 
use of (163.2h has been discussed in Sect. 137. Cf. also the sources cited in footnote 2, p. 823. 
' ERTEL and KöHLER [1949. 9], GmsE [1951, 10]. 
480 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 164. 
In the representations (163.1) 8 and (163.2) 2 , one of the three components 
of the vector potentials v and v' may be eliminated. For example, if v is any 
vector potential of p, so that 
yg _xr. = ekmf> vp,m = ekmf> (ovpfoX"'), set 
L ==- v2 + J ::: dxa + F(xt, x2) ') 
M = v1 - J ::~ dx3 + G (x1, x2). 
(163.4) 
Then by differentiation follows1 
oL 1/a "1 oM lr "2 oL oM 1/a ·a 8x8 = fgx' or = vgx' (Jxl + (Jx2 =- vgx' (163.5) 
provided oFfox1 +oGfox2 =0. Thus the velocity :i: may always be expressed in 
terms of two potentials. 
164. The equation of continuity in space-time; its generat solution. Let. v be 
the world velocity vector (153-3) of a motion, and consider the contravariant world 
vector density e0 defined by 
(164.1) 
where e is the mass density and g is the world scalar density defined by (153.12). 
The equation 
(164.2) 
is invariant under general transformations of the four space-time coordinates. 
In every Euclidean frame (cf. Sect. 152), we have 
Q = (e z", e), (164.3) 
so that (164.2) reduces to 
0(! 8 ( "k)- Tl + ()zk (! z - O' (164.4) 
which is the Cartesian co-ordinate form of (156.5)1• Thus (164.2) is a world 
tensor form of the continuity equation. It can also be written in the alternative world tensor form 
(164.5) 
where the absolute world scalar invariant Id is given by (153.13h. and i! = 
v0 x~ in accord with (154.18). 
Equations of the type (164.2) were solved by EuLER2 for spaces of any number 
of dimensions. For the four-dimensional case, his solution is 
(164.6) 
since, trivially, F=F,rvr=o, the function F(a!, t) is substantially constant, as 
are G and H. Conversely, (164.6) yields a solution of (164.2) when F, G, and H 
1 That these formulae furnish a solutionwas noted by LAGRANGE [1783, 1, § 13] for the 
case of reetangular Cartesian Co-ordinates; our proof of sufficiency is adapted from one 
given by GEIS [1956, 8, § 3] under an unnecessary restriction. Note that (163.5) yields the 
contravariant components, not the physical components of velocity, in arbitrary curvilinear 
co-ordinates. 1 [1770, 1, §§ 44-49]. Cf. the treatment of this and related problems by FINZI and 
PASTORI [1949, 11, Chap. IV, § 7]; cf. also our Subchapter D IV. 
Sects. 165, 166. Momentum, moment of momentum, and kinetic energy. 481 
are any substantially constant functions. This result is fairly obvious, since it 
amounts to a statement that the most general velocity field may be obtained by 
mapping vectorially onto x-t space a field of vectors in X space tangent to 
the curves of intersection of three appropriate families in surfaces which are 
stationary and hence consist always in the same particles. The mass in 1"' is 
• X, y, Z 
..". ..". 
given byl m = J (! dv = r at(. G_._!!)l dxdy dz' l = jdFdGdH (164·7) 
= (F; - F1) (G2 - G1) (H2 - H1), 
provided 1"' is small enough that the mapping x, y, z- F, G, H be one-to-one. 
This generalizes ( 163.3). 
EULER's solution (164.6) includes as special cases all those given above in 
Sects. 161 to 163, and the interpretation just obtained likewise includes the foregoing. 
It is tobe noted that the derivatives occurring in (164.6) are ordinary partial 
derivatives, even though the result is valid for arbitrary co-ordinates in spacetime. However, it is valid only locally, and its non-linearity makes it difficult 
to use with profit. 
c) Momentum. 
Throughout this part of the subchapter, the Co-ordinate system is assumed 
to be reetangular Cartesian. Generalization to curvilinear co-ordinates may be 
achieved by the method of Sect. App. 17. 
165. Center of mass. The center of mass of body 1"'is the point whose position 
vector c is defined by 2 
9'Rc=fpd9'R=fePdv. (165.1) 
..". ..". 
In a frame such that the origin of the position vector p' is at the center of mass, 
we have J p' d9'R = o. (165.2) 
..". 
Hence a body may not lie entirely on one side of any plane through its center 
of mass 3• 
The center of mass of a deformable body generally moves about within the 
body in the course of time. In order for the center of mass to reside in a particle 
and move with it, it is necessary and sufficient that the velocity of the motion, 
p, at the center of mass shall equal c as calculated from (165.1). Any homogeneaus 
motion (142.1) has this property4• 
166. Momentum, moment of momentum, and kinetic energy. The momentum ~. sometimes called the linear momentum or impulse or inertia, of the body 
1"' is defined by l.ßk = J zk dm, ~ = J p d9'R. (166.1) 
'f'" ..". 
1 Ym [1957. 19, §VII]. 2 In researches donein 1758-1759, EuLER [1765, 2, §§ 7-10] [1765, 1, §§ 285-287]. 
after criticizing loose ideas on the "center of gravity" of earlier writers, introduced (165.1) 
and the name center of mass as well as an alternative, "center of inertia", and established 
the vectorial invariance of the definition [1765, 2, §§ 11-16]. 3 (165.2) and the above inference from it were given by EuLER [1765, 1, § 286] 1765.2, 
§ 18], the latter somewhat obscurely. 4 LEVI-CIVITA [1935, 3]. We do not follow the analysis of SCHWERDTFEGER [1935, 5]. 
who claims a broad extension of this result. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 31 
482 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 166. 
The moment of momentum ~["Pl, sometimes called the angular momentum, of 
the body "Y with respect to the point *z is defined by 
N"!:1- J (z[k- *z[k) (im1- *zmJ) dWL (166.2) 
'"Y 
The axial vector ~[•pJ corresponding to the skew-symmetric tensor {)1"!:1 is 
called by the same names and is given by 
~[•pJ == j (p- *p) X (p- *p) diJJl. (166.3) 
"'' Sometimes, but not always, there is no loss in generality in taking *p = 0. The 
superscript *p is omitted in cases where no confusion should result. 
The kinetic energy Sl' of the body "Y is defined by 
Sl'==tfP2diJJL (166.4) 
[Cf. (94.1).] 2 Sl', or sometimes also Sl', is called the vis viva or live force ofthe body. 
The concepts of momentum, moment of momentum, and kinetic energy of 
a finite body are peculiar to Euclidean space and are the stuff of which classical 
mechanics is made. They deserve the most minute analysis 1. 
In non-Euclidean spaces, the Iack of an invariant finite parallel transport makes it 
impossible todefinesuch volume integrals meaningfully 2 -at least, impossible without introducing new concepts not present in Euclidean mechanics. Since all physical experience 
necessarily concerns finite bodies, the impossibility of forming geometrically invariant mcasures 
of the inertia and energy of such bodies reduces mechanics in general spaces to an uneasy 
formalism. Two approaches are used: (1) Euclidean arguments are applied to infinitely 
small volumes, leading to formal analogues of all local equations in classical mechanics, or 
(2) the non-Euclidean space is supposed imbedded in a Euclidean space of higher dimension, 
where the usual measures and laws of mechanics are valid, thus inducing certain laws in the 
non-Euclidean subspace. The results of these two approaches are not the same. For the 
former, see Sect. 238; examples of the latterare given in Sects. 212 to 214. From the standpoirrt of mere postulation, there is no error in either of these approaches. For the conceptual 
foundations, they are both inadequate in that they use Euclidean concepts as a crutch. 
(Of course, the objection to the latter method is not relevant to the theories of rods and shells, 
where the Euclidean imbedding space is the usual three-dimensional one.) 
In the more general case when discrete as well as distributed masses are 
present, by (155.2) we get 
n 
~ = .r (p- *p) X (p- *p) edv + 2: (Pa- *p) X (Pa- *p) ID1a, (166.5) 
'"Y a~l 
n 
2 Sl> =I eP2 av+ 2: mal>~. "'' a~I 
In particular, for a single mass-point we have 
q3=ID1p, ~=ID1(p-*p) X (p-*p), 2Sl'=!JJ1p2. (166.6) 
The quantities !JJ, ~. and Sf are special cases of general moments of the type 
mk, ... k,.m="'fzk,···zk,.imdm,) 
Sfk, ... k,.mq ="'; zk,· .. zkn im iq am. (166.7) 
1 The history of these quantities has never bcen written; on the basis of the information 
known to us, we rest content with stating that the concept of linear momentum seems to 
originate in the middle ages, while kinetic energy and moment of momentum were introduced 
by LEIBNIZ and EuLER, respectively. It is certain that the generat definitions of all three, 
and some of their major properties, first appear in the later writings of EuLER. 2 Cf. VAN DANTZIG [1934, 10, Part IV, § 1]. 
Sect. 167. Theorems on the center of mass. 483 
etc., where we have set *z = 0. In this notation 
( 166.8) 
While the introduction of the higher moments is suggested by the occurrence of analogaus 
quantities in statistical mechanics and in the kinetic theory of gases, their dynamical significance is as yet unknown, and their properties remain to be learned. Dynamical laws concerning them will be proposed in Sect. 205 and Sect. 232. 
The quantities ip, ~. and ~ are defined in a particular frame. Their invariance 
under change of frame will be investigated in the two following sections. 
167. Theorems on the center of mass. If we take the volume 'f'"as material 
and differentiate (165.1) materially, from (166.1), (81.2)r, and (76.9), whether 
or not mass is conserved, we get 
ip = wi c - f p (log e + Id) d m, l 
= IDl c +~(c-p) (loge + Id) diDl. 
..y 
(167.1) 
When mass is conserved, by (156.5) 2 the volume integral vanishes, and we get the 
fundamental theorem on the center of mass1 : The momentum of any body, 
no matter what deformation it be undergoing, equals the momentum of a masspoint located at the center of mass and 
having the same mass as the body. In 
particular, in a frame such that the 
origin is constantly at the center of 
mass, the momentum vanishes. 
The moment of momentum ( 166.3), 
being a function only of differences 
of position, is invariant with respect 
to change of frame, so long as the 
primed frame be not rotating: 
~ = ~' - j (p' - *p') X } 
X {:p'- *p') diDl, ( 167.2) Fig. 22. Center of mass. 
it being understood that *p and *p' are the position vectors of the same point 
in the two frames. Sometimes, however 2, it is preferable to consider the relation 
between the moments of momentum with respect to the origins of the two frames: 
~coJ_ fpxpdiDl, 
..y 
Putting p = b +p', we obtain 
~'[O'J_ f p' xp' diDl. 
..y 
~[O] = 9Jl [bX b + bxc'- bXc'J + ~'[O'l, 
(167.3) 
(167.4) 
where c' is the position vector of the center of mass in the primed frame (Fig. 22). 
When there is a mere static shift of origin, b = 0, and we get 
~[OJ = b X ip' + ~'[O'J = b X ip + ~[O'J, (167.5) 
1 KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, § 230]. A closely related, much older statement is given in 
§ 196 below. 
2 PAINLEVE [1895, 4, 2e Le~on]. 
31* 
484 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 167. 
showing that the difference of the moments of momentum with respect to two 
different points is simply b X~ (or b X~'), where bis the vector joining the two1 • 
When the origin of the primed frame is taken as the center of mass, (167.4) 
reduces to ~[oJ =cxmc + ~'[ 'l: (167.6) 
The moment of momentum of any body equals the sum of the moment of momentum 
of a mass-point having the same mass as the body and located at the center of mass, 
plus the moment of momentum with respect to the center of mass. From (167.4) 
it is plain that no such simple decomposition is valid if the relative moment of 
momentum is taken with respect to a point other than the center of mass. In 
order for (167.6) to hold, it is necessary and sufficient that 
Similarly, when 
we have 
bx c' = bxc'. 
2~'= JP' 2 dW1, 
"Y 
~ = t m b2 + m b . c' + ~·. 
(167.7) 
(167.8) 
(167.9) 
If the origin of the primed system is taken at the center of mass, this becomes 
(167.10) 
whence follows ~~ ~', where ~ = S'r' if and only if the center of mass is stationary. 
This same formula may be used to compare the relative kinetic energies with 
respect to the center of mass and any other point. Hence follow the theorems 
of König 2 : If we compare the kinetic energies calculated in a class of frames not 
in relative rotation, then 
1. The relative kinetic energy with respect to the center of mass is the least possible; 
2. The kinetic energy of any body is the sum of the kinetic energy of a masspoint having the same mass as the body and located at the center of mass, plus the 
kinetic energy relative to the center of mass. 
The foregoing theorems enable us to give a rational position to the classical 
mechanics of point masses without recourse to the strict concept of mass-point 
(Sect. 155) or any other mention of the infinitely small: We may consider a body 
of mass m, whatever its size, to be in motion as a mass-point of mass m, located at 
its center of mass, if 
(1) Our knowledge is sufficient to determine the motion of its center of mass, and 
(2) W e do not require knowledge of its moment of momentum ~' and kinetic 
energy S'r' relative to the center of mass. 
According to this view, the mechanics of mass-points appears not as the 
fundamental descipline of mechanics but rather as a degenerate special case 
when we have but an incomplete description of the actual motion of an extended 
body. Since wehavenot said that it is an infinitely small body, or a geometrical 
1 In (167.5) the symbol _f)[O'J stands for the moment of momentum taken with respect 
to the origin of the primed frame but calculated in the unprimed frame. Since the frames 
arenot in relative rotation, we have p = b +p', and hence 
_f)[O'] = f (p - b) X (p - b) dlm = _f)'[O'] · 
"Y 
2 [1751, 1, PP· 172-173]. Cf. MASOTTI [1932, 91. 
Sect. 168. Momentum, moment of momentum, and energy in a rotating frame. 485 
point, we suffer no conceptual revulsion in treating the earth as a mass-point 
on occasion; we are aware of its extension, its spin, its geometrical irregularity, 
and the motions of its winds and tides, which in some problems may be the focus 
of our interest, but for its motion with respect to the sun they are of little or no 
importance. 
168. Momentum, moment of momentum, and energy in a rotating frame. We 
generalize the formulae of the last section by allowing the primed frame to be 
in rotation with respect to the unprimed frame. 
By substituting (143.3) into (166.1) we get 
~ = m (b + C' + w X c') = m c I 
in conformity with (167.1). 
By substituting (143.3) into (166.3) we get 
where 
~ = ~~ + ~~:r~ 
~~~~~ = f (p- a) X [w X (p- a)J d9R. 
?"" 
(168.1) 
( 168.2) 
(168.3) 
The relation ( 168.2) generalizes ( 167.2)1 ; the corresponding generalization of 
( 167.4) is elaborate but easy to work out. Since p- a = p'- a', primed quantities may be used to calculate ~~:fl, but the angular velocity w is that of 
the primed frame with respect to the unprimed. To discuss the form of ~~~(, 
we introduce EULER's tensor (.i[a] and the tensor of inertia ~[al by the definitions1 
(.i[al=J(p-a)(p-a)d9R, l ~[a] = ~ j (p- a)2d9Jl- (i[al; {168.4) 
1 The great researches of EuLER on these tensors deserve special notice because they 
are never cited in reference to the much later work on second-order tensors and matrices they 
in part anticipated. In 1741 or earlier, EULER introduced the name moments of inertia for the 
diagonal components of .3; these quantities were already familiar. In [1765, 2, §§ 26-29] he 
derived the tensor law of transformation for them. In [ibid., § 34] he defined the principal axes 
by the extremal properties of the moments of inertia, and he gave these axes the name they 
have retained ever after; in [ibid., § 37] he derived the characteristic equation of .3, which he 
proved to have three real roots, to which correspond at least three mutually perpendicular 
principal axes [ibid., §§ 38-42]. For these axes, the tensor .3 assumes diagonal form, and the 
corresponding components are named principal moments of inertia; any moment of inertia 
is expressedas a linear combination of these [ibid., §§ 43-45]. If the principal moments are 
distinct, there are only three principal axes; if two principal moments coincide, any axis 
normal to the one corresponding to the third moment is a principal axis; if all three principal 
moments are equal, every axis is a principal axis [ibid., §§ 46-47]. These results, obtained 
in 1758-1759, are presented even more clearly and fully in [1765, 1, Chap. 5]. Cf. also 
[1776, 2, §§ 33-34]. 
The principal axes themselves have a short prior history. In [ 1746, 1, § 77] EuLER bad 
found that in order for a Iamina to rotate freely about an axis, the two products of inertia 
with respect to that axis must vanish. In [ 17 52, 2, § 48], EuLER had introduced the full 
tensor of inertia and bad shown that permanent rotation of a rigid body is possible only 
about an axis suchthat the appropriate products of inertia vanish [ibid., §§ 14-16, 53]. but 
he bad not deterl:nined the existence of such axes. SEGNER [1755, 1, pp. 16-30], who 
acknowledged having seen EuLER's paper [ibid., p. 15], then proved at Jength that at least 
three such axes exist and are mutually orthogonal, etc.; in particular, he derived the characteristic cubic satisfied by the principal moments of inertia. 
486 C. TRUESDELL and R..TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 169. 
these symmetric tensors are associated with the body "'" and with a particular 
point a. W e find that 
~~:1 = j {(p- a)2w- [w. (p- a)J (p- a)}dim,) 
=W .~[a] =~[al.w. 
(168.5) 
In component form, (168.5) may be written 
c;[a]_ C'><[a] "e'km- ekmp BqrsWrs "'qp • ( 168.6) 
Since ~}:l = ~l':J, there exist three real mutually orthogonal principal directions 
for ~[aJ; these are the principal axes of inertia. From ( 168.4) the normal components 
of ~[aJ are J [(y- ay)2 + (z- az) 2] dim, etc., and hence the proper numbers of il[aJ 
-r 
are positive if the body has positive volume. Thus the quadric of ~[a] is an 
ellipsoid, the ellipsoid of inertia1• The normal components of il[aJ are called moments 
of inertia; the shear components, products of inertia. 
The tensor of inertia, its principal axes, and its proper numbers are all defined in terms of a particular point. The importance of the formula ~~:1 = ~[aJ. w 
lies in its linearity in w: Once a point a is selected, the tensor ~[aJ can be 
evaluated from a knowledge only of the shape of the body "'"and of the distribution of density within it; ~[oJ depends on the orientation of the primed frame 
only through the tensor law, and it is independent of the angular velocity of the 
primed frame. In the special case when the body is at rest with respect to the 
primed frame, we have ~' =0, and (168.2) shows that the entire moment of momentum of the body is ~~:rl. In the case of rigid motion, it is possible to choose 
a primed frame of this kind, and in this frame ~[*pJ is constant in time; w is 
the angular velocity of the body (Sects. 84, 86, 143), and the geometrical meaning 
of (168.3) is simple. 
To compare the moments of momentum ~[OJ and ~'[O'J with respect to the 
two origins, by substituting (143-3) into (167.3) 1 we easily calculate 
~[O] =im [bx b + bx (wxc') + b xc' + c'x b] + ~~?t'J + ~'[O'J. (168.7) 
If the origin of the primed frame is the center of mass, three of the four punctual 
terms vanish; also in the case when the origin is stationary there is a corresponding simplification. In a fully general motion, (168.5) remains valid, but since 
~~ [O'l generally does not vanish and the components of ~[O'J are continually 
changing, the result is seldom useful. 
By substituting (143-3) into (166.4) we get 
where 
g:r = im [ t b2 + b · c' + w · c' X b J + W • ~~ [O'J + g:r~~'l + g:r' 
2 sr~~'J- w . ~[O'] • w = ~~?t'J . w = w . ~m'l. 
(168.8) 
(168.9) 
169. Interpretation of certain previous results as theorems on momentum and 
energy. Various formulae derived earlier may be regarded as expressions for 
momentum and energy. First, in a homochoric motion we have 
~Ne= f p dv, ~rolfe = J pxpdv, 2S'e/e =fp2dv, (169.1) 
-r -r -r 
and since p is solenoidal, we may apply the results of Sect. App. 31. By 
(App. 31.23), (App.31.25), (App. 31.21), and (App. 31.12) we thus get formulae 
1 CAUCHY [1827, 3]. 
Sect. 169. Interpretation of certain previous results as theorems on moment 
relating ,, ~. and Sl' to certain vorticity averages: 
2'/e = fpxwdv +~ (daxp) xp, 
r • 
2~[ lfe =-J p2wdv +~daxp p, 
r • 
3 ~[ lfe = f px (pxw) dv- ~ [(daxp) xp] xp, 
r • 
Sl'/e = fp · wxpdv +~da· [iP2P-PP· p]. 
r • 
487 
{169.2) 
In the formulae for ' and ~[OJ, the surface integrals vanish when the velocity 
is normal to ~. In an isochoric irrotational motion, the volume integrals all 
vanish, and thus ,, ~[Ol, and Sl' are determinate from the boundary velocities 
alone. 
In a steady motion with steady density, e p is solenoidal, and in just the same 
way we derive 
2'=fpxcurl(ep)dv+~[(daxep)xp], ) 
r • 
2~[0J =-f p2 curl(eP) dv +~daxeP p, 
r • 
3 ~[OJ = J p x [px curl (e p)] dv- HC(dax e p) xp] xp}. 
(169.3) 
However, if we apply (App.31.12) to e p we getan expression for J e2P2 dv rather 
than for 2 Sl' itself. The formula r 
2 Sl' =~da· p (e p · p)-f p · div (e p p) dv, ( 169.4) 
r 
valid for all types of motion, is easy to verify directly. In this formula the surface 
integral vanishes when ~ is a fixed boundary. 
It is easy to generalize {169.2) and (169.3) by expressionsvalid for any motion, 
but these involve various combinations of the derivatives of e which render 
them difficult to apply. For an exception, consider the simpler formula (76.12), 
which in a homochoric motion yields 
{169.5) 
for a general motion, a corresponding formula is 
' = ~ da · e p p - f p div (e p) d v,) • r 
=~da. e p p + J p ~;- dv. • r 
(169.6) 
Hence we see that in a motion with steady density, if all finite boundaries are 
stationary and if in any infinite regions e p p = o (p-2), then the momentum is 
zero. In particular, it is sufficient that e p = o (p-3). 
For a steady irrotational motion, whether or not it is isochoric, in (App. 31.5) we 
may put c = (!p, '*' = V, where V is the velocity potential (Sect. 88), and obtain1 
2Sf= ~ eV-- da 
dV 
dn (169.7) 
1 KELVIN [1849, 3, § 7]. 
488 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 170. 
for the case when the region bounded by 6 is simply connected. In the multiply connected 
case, appropriate multiples of the mass fluxes through the barriers sufficient to render the 
region simply connected must be added to the result of using (169.7) with any particular 
determination of the cyclic function V. 
For plane homochoric motion, by applying AMPERE's transformation to the pair of functions Q oQjax, Q oQJoy and then using (161.2) and (161.5), we obtain 
2Sf0/e = ~ Q ~~ ds-J Qwda, (169.8) 
where sro is the kinetic energy per unit height normal to the plane of motion. Various other 
formulae for sr or Stfe in various circumstances may be derived from the representation 
given in Sects. 161 to 164. 
The kinetic energy ~was defined by (94.1), which is formally equivalent to 
(166.4), and KELVIN's fundamental theorem of minimum energy was given in 
Sect. 94. In some cases the total squared speed, to which ~/(! reduces for hornoehone motion, has properties more illuminating than those of ~ itself; the general formula (93.1) as weil as estimates in terms of vorticity and expansion 
were given in Sect. 93· 
Since the density of ~. per unit mass, is tp2, or tx2, every theorem concerning 
the speed is an energy theorem. Indeed, we have called tx2 the specific kinetic 
energy and have obtained many of its properties in Parte III of Subchapter II. 
Note also that the results cited in footnote 2, p. 822, may be regarded as energy 
theorems. 
170. Rate of change of momentum, moment of momentum, and kinetic energy. 
By applying (156.8) to the definitions (166.1), (166.}), and (166.4) we obtain1, 
for any body "/'", 
p = f pdiDL ~=I (p- *p) X (p- *p)diDL if: = f p. pdiDl. (170.1) ~ ~ ~ 
For the higher moments (166.7), formulae of such simplicity do not generally 
hold. For example, with *z =0 we get 
mkm = f (zk zm + zk zm) d9R, (170.2) ~ 
whence (170.1) 2 follows by taking the skew-symmetric part. 
If in the general transport theorem (81.3) we substitute successively \1! =efJ, 
\1! =pX(!p, \1! =ieP2, we obtain '= ~~ +~da·eftp, d 
• ro1 ac..coJ J, . . ac..coJ J, .. ~ = -""-8t-+'j'da · ppx e p = -""-0t-+ 'j'px (e p p· da), (170.3) 
These formulae express the rate of change of ~. ~C l, and ~ for a given body 
as the sum of a local or apparent rate and an appropriate flux through the bound1 (170.1)3 was noticed by STOKES [1851, 2, § 49]. (170.1)1 and (170.1) 2 , in principle, are 
still older, but the classical writers, beginning with EuLER ( 1776), were content to regard 
the right-hand sides a priori as measures of force and moment. As purely kinematical formulae, apparently (170.1Jt, 2 were first derived by v. MrsEs [1909, 8, § 9], who obtained also 
(170.3Jt. The Straightforwardtreatment given here derives from CrsoTTI [1917, 4, §§ 3-4]. 
Cf. also SERINI [1941, 6]. 
Sect. 170. Rate of change of momentum, moment of momentum, and kinetic energy. 489 
ing surface1 . From them we conclude that in a steady motion with steady density, 
if no material enters or leaves v, then the momentum, the moment of momentum, 
and the kinetic energy of the material occupying v are conserved. The truth of this 
statement is obvious, but special cases of it are sometimes proved at length. 
In the formulae for ~ and ~ro1, the flux is proportional to ePP· This important tensor, whose contravariant components are eick Jcm, is called the momentum transfer. It has appeared already in the identities (99.18) and (156.7), which 
may be used for an alternative derivation of (170.3)1 and (170.3) 2 ; those identities 
assert that the divergence of the momentum transfer may be regarded as the supply 
or source strength for creation of momentum per unit mass, to be added to the 
apparent rate of change of momentum in order to yield the total rate experienced 
by a moving particle. Cf. also Sect. 207. 
We record a variational formula which follows at once from (97.4): 
Jxkrhkd9Jl= :tJxk<5xkd9Jl-<5~. (170.4) 
"I'" "I'" 
where the variation of density is so adjusted that <5 diDl = <5 (e dv) = 0. 
We now calculate the apparent rate of change of momentum2 and energy 
due to a difference of observers. Differentiating (168.1), (168.2), and (168.8) 
with respect to time yields 
~ = 5m [b + c' +wxc' + 2wxc' +wx (wxc')] = 5mc, 
(, = ~· + ~~:r1 + w x ~·. 
~ = m [b . b + b . e + h . (c' + w x c') + 
+ w · c' X b + w · ( c' + w X c') X b + w · c' X b J + 
+ w · ~'[ '] + w · ((,'[O'l + w X ~'[O'l) + ~~~'J + ~', 
(170.5) 
where a dot superposed upon a primed quantity stands for d'jdt. The simplicity 
of (170.5) 3 is somewhat deceiving, since ~[•pJ stands for d ~[•Pljdt, not d' ~[•plfdt. 
The relation between (,roJ and ~·[O'l is still more elaborate since in general the 
two origins are in motion with respect to one another 3• By (170.1) 2 , the two 
quantities tobe compared are given by 
~roJ = f pxpdiDl, ~·ro' 1 = J p' x p' am. (170.6) 
"I'" "I'" 
Using (143.6) in (170.6h, we get 
~[OJ = f (b +p') X (b + WX p'+ 2wX p'+ w X (wxp') + p') d9Jl. (170.7) 
"I'" 
Before evaluating all the terms, we note first that if ~·[O'J is the tensor of inertia 
with respect to the origin of the primed frame, for its material rate of change as 
apparent to an observer in the primed frame we have by (168.4) 
~·ro'] = 2 t J p'. p' a m - J (p' p' + p' p') a m. (170.8) 
"I'" "I'" 
1 It is easily possible to study the material rate of change of other quantities associated 
with the mass flow (!P· For example, V. BJERKNES [1898, 1, § 18] calculated the rate of 
change of the circulation of eP about a material circuit, but the result is not illuminating. 2 v. MrsEs [1909, 8, § 9.2] constructed an interpretation for the relative rate of change 
of momentum in a stream tube. 3 Cf. PAINLEVE [1895, 4, 2° Le-;:on], HUNTINGTON [1914, 6], KELLOGG [1924, 8]. 
490 
Hence 
Also 
Co TRUESDELL and Ro TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theorieso 
f p' x (2m xp') d9Jl =2m 0 f [1 (p' 0 p')- p' p'] d9Jl 1 
"/" "/" 
= m 0 f [21 (p' 0 p')- (p' p' + p' p') + 
"/" 
+ (p' p'- p' p') J d m I 
= m 0 ~'[0'] + m X ~'[O'J. 
J p' x [m x (m xp')] d9Jl =-f (p1 
"/" "/" 
• m) (m xp') d9Jll l = - m x f p' p' d m . m I 
"/" 
= m X ~'[O'J. m. 
Using (170.9) and (170.10) in (170.7) yields1 
where 
Secto 170. 
( 170.9) 
(170.10) 
(170.11) 
- ~c = b X m [ b + w X c' ~ 2m X c' + m X (m X c') + c'] + c' X m b I l 
=bx9Jlc+c'x9Jlbl (170.12) 
- ~r = W. ~'[0'] + m. ~•[O'J + m X ~'[0'] + m X ~•[O'J. m 0 
The simple formula (170.5) 2 compares for two different observers the rates 
of change of moment of momentum calculated with respect to the same point, 
which may be moving in any way. (170.11) 1 on the other hand, compares the 
rate of change of moment of momentum when each observer calculates it with 
respect to his own frame and origin. In (170.12), all dots on primed quantities 
indicate time rates as apparent in the primed frameo Thus an observer in the 
primed frame by combining appropriate quantities he hirnself observes may 
calculate the rate ~[OJ apparent to an observer in the unprimed frame. In rigid 
motionl it is possible to choose the primed frame rigidly attached to the body1 
and then we have both ~·[O'J =0 and ~'[O'J =01 so that ~r assumes the classical 
simple form used in rigid dynamics (cf. Sect. 294). Further simple cases will be 
mentioned in Sect. 197. 
The formula (17001) 2 has been used by NYBORG 2 to obtain an interpretation for the spatial 
diffusion tensor w* defined by (101.5) 2 0 Writing quantities evaluated at the center of mass 
with a superscript c, we have by (16501) 
J (zk- ck) Zm di.JR = J (zk- ck) [z:i, + (zq- Cq) z:;.,q + O(r2)] di.JR, l 
"/" "/" 
= a;kq z:i,,q + O(r6 ), 
(170.13) 
where r is the diameter of -rand where ~ is the Euler tensor defined by (168.4)1 , with 
a =Co Hence a; J (zk - ck) Zm di.JR 
··c Lo qk Lo "'" ( ) zm,q ,~~ ---ys = ,~~ y6 170.14 
lf the ellipsoid of inertia is a sphere, we have a;mk = -l~ <5mk• where ~ is the polar moment 
of inertia about Co In this case ( 1 70o14) reduces to 
J (zk- ck) Zm di.JR 
z:;, k = Lim -'-"~"----.--:~-- ' r-o -l~ (170.15) 
1 In principle, this calculation is due to EuLER [1765, 3, §§ 16-24] [17760 3, §§ 31-34]. 2 [1953, 20]. Cf. TRUESDELL [1956, 22]. The analysis presented above is more general 
than that in the two sources citedo 
Sects. 171, 172. Galilean invariance. 491 
hence, by ( 170.1 )2 , * L" SJkm wkm = 1m---,:---"'-, 
r---+-0 av (170.16) 
where we have omitted the superscript c. This result asserts that the curl of the acceleration 
at ~ is proportional to the rate of change of moment of momentum experienced by a vanishingly 
small sphere centered1 at ~-
171. Galilean invariance. We now determine the dass of frames in which the 
rate of change of momentum of every body is the same as its rate of change of 
momentum in one given frame. Since (170.5) 1 may be written 
(171.1) 
in orderthat '= ,, for arbitrary im and arbitrary c', i.e., for all bodies, whatever 
their masses and locations, we must have b =0 and w =0. This result is sometimes called the Galilean principle of relativity: In orderthat every body shall 
appear to have the same rate of change of momentum to two observers, it is necessary 
and sutficient that their frames be in relative translation at constant velocity. That 
rate of change of momentum fails to beinvariant under rotation or acceleration 
of the frame of the observer is a very old remark, whose history we do not 
attempt to relate here. 
Given any frame, the totality of frames in uniform translation with respect 
to it constitutes its Galilean class; quantities invariant under change of frame 
within this subgroup of the group of rigid motions are called Galilean invariants. 
By (167.2), ~ is a Galilean invariant, and so is ~. Of course ~l l, ~l l, Sf, 
and ~ are not Galilean invariants, and also steadiness of motion (Sects. 67, 146) 
fails of Galilean invariance. Cf. the general treatment of the kinematical basis 
of Galilean invariance in Sect. 154. 
C. Singular surfaces and Waves. 
172. Scope and plan of the chapter. We organize and describe those properties 
of surfaces of discontinuity, such as vortex sheets, shock waves, and acceleration 
waves, as are common to all media. First we derive conditions that hold at any 
given instaut and express the fact that the discontinuity is spread out smoothly 
over a surface, not isolated at a point or a line. The second subchapter presents 
a generaldifferential description of moving surfaces. Then we prove kinematical 
conditions expressing the persistence of a surface of discontinuity. The fourth 
subchapter classifies the various kinds of discontinuities associated with the 
motion of a material and proves simple theorems characterizing them. Finally, 
we obtain the general form taken on by a conservation law when applied at a 
surface of discontinuity. 
Most of the major ideas of the subject derive from the work of CHRISTOFFEL 
(1877) and HuGONIOT (1885), extended in the classical treatise of HADAMARD 
(1899-1900)2. 
1 The variation of density within the sphere need not be considered, since the distance 
of the center of the sphere from its center of mass is 0 (r2) and hence may be neglected in the 
interpretation of (170.16). 2 [1903, 11, Chap. II]. There arealso the expositians of ZEMPLEN [1905, 9] and LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 6]; the latter labors the analytical side but is confined to a narrower 
range than the older works. Same major additions are contained in a paper by KoTCHINE 
[1926, 3]. Recent studies of discontinuities have emphasized calculation of solutions in 
particular theories of materials and have not extended the general theory. There is no modern 
treatise on the subject. 
Surfaces at which the derivatives of the velocity are discontinuous first appear in the 
acoustical researches of EuLER ( 1764-1765); the possibility that the velocity itself may be 
discontinuous was first remarked by STOKES ( 1848). 
492 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 173, 1 74. 
I. Geometry of singular surfaces. 
173. Definition of a singular surface. Intentionally we begin our analysis on 
a very general plane; the application to the three-dimensional Euclidean space, 
which furnishes our main interest in this work, will follow shortly. 
Consider a regular surface " which is the common boundary of two regions [Jl+ 
and [Jl- in any real space (Fig. 23). Let \II (;.c) be a function which is continuous 
in the interiors of [Jl+ and [Jl- and which approaches definite limit values \II + 
and \11- as ;.c approaches a point re0 on " while remaining within fJl-+ and [Jl-, 
""..---....... / ' // \ / cll+ ~-__,,., 
respectively. At re0 , \II need not be defined. 
The jump of \II across " at re0 is denoted by 1 
I 
I 
I 
(173.1) 
[cf. (App.36.3)]. The sign of the jump isamatter 
of convention, but, since all our considerations 
are local, it will occasion no trouble. The quantity 
[\II] is a function of position upon "· 
I 
Fig. 23. Singular surface. When (173.1) is applied to a tensor T, the 
jump [T] is a tensor defined as a function of 
position upon "· If [T] is normal to "· the discontinuity of T is said to be 
longitudinal; if tangent to "· transversal 2• In a metric space, the jump of any 
tensor may be resolved uniquely into longitudinal and transversal components, 
such a resolution being given for three-dimensional vectors 3 by an identity 
such as (App. 30.6). 
If [\II] ::j=O, the surface " is said to be singular with respect \11. 
174. HADAMARD's Iemma. The entire theory of singular surfaces rests upon 
Hadamard's lemma4 : Let \II be defined and continuously differentiable in the 
interior of a region [Jl+ with smooth boundary "· and let \II and o" \II approach finite 
limits \II + and o" \II + as " is approacked upon paths interior to [Jl+. Let re = re (l) be a 
smooth curve upon "• and assume that \II + is differentiable on this path. Then 
(174.1) 
In other words, the theorem of the total differential holds for the limiting values 
as 11 is approached from one side only. The function \II need not be defined upon 
1 The notationwas introduced by CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, § 6]. 2 HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 3], [1903, 11, ~ 115]. 3 In some three-dimensional applications it is convenient to use the notations of EMDE 
(1915, 2., § 1] (cf. SPIELREIN (1916, 5, §§ 10, 26]): 
Gradu =n[u], 
Divu = n · [u]. 
Curlu = nx[u], 
where n is the unit normal pointing into 01~. Thus Divu and Curlu are the longitudinal 
and transversal jumps of u, and the resolution of [u] is 
[u] = nDivu- nxCurl u. 
While Grad u, Divu, and Curl u are sometimes called the "surface gradient, divergence, 
and curl" of the discontinuous field u, they must not be confused with the differential invariants of a field defined intrinsically on the surface. EMDE's notations are motivated by 
(App. 36.2). 
' HADAMARD [1903, 11, , 72] gives two proofs, the first of which isthat reproduced above. 
The Iemma was used tacitly by earlier authors. A more elaborate proof is given by LicHTENSTEIN (1929, 4, Chap. 1, § 9]. 
Sect. 175. Superficialand geometrical conditions of compatibility. 493 
the other side of d. If it is, and if the corresponding limiting values w- and 
8"\1!- exist and have the required smoothness, a similar result holds for them, 
but dw-·jdl is in general unrelated to d\f!+jdl. 
To prove (174.1), we need only remark that for two sufficiently near points 
on d, of the polygonal paths employed in the classical proof applicable to interior 
points at least one is interior to ßi+, so the classical argument may be applied 
to it. For the case of two dimensions, the two paths are indicated in Fig. 24. 
The diagram is merely heuristic: HADAMARD's lemma is a proposition in differential calculus, independent of any geometry that may hold in the spaces 
where we choose to apply it. 
In particular, in an affine space it may be applied to the individual components T::: of a tensor field. By adding to each side of (174.1) in this case 
suitable expressions made up from connection symbols 
and from T:::, we thus obtain 
f···+==T··; dvr =T''+ dxk 
··· ... ,r dt ····" dt (174.2) 
where f·.::+, the intrinsic derivative of T.::+ along the x 
Path ~ =~ (v (l)) on d, is defined as the quantity to the Fig. 24. Diagram for proof 
right of the identity symbol, and where T:::~" stands for 
of HADAMARD'S lemma. 
the limiting value of the covariant derivative T:::." as the point in question on d 
is approached from within ßi+. 
175. Superficial and geometrical conditions of compatibility. We now apply 
HADAMARD's lemma to singular surfaces as defined in Sect. 173. When, hereinafter, we derive a condition conceming the derivatives of a quantity \f!, we 
presume without further explicit statement that all derivatives of \1! of orders 
up to and including the one considered exist and are continuous in ßi+ and f,iand approachdefinite limits at 0 along paths lying wholly in ßi+ and wholly in Si-. 
These limit values are assumed continuously differentiable functions of position on d. Thus HADAMARD's lemma (174.1) may be applied to the limiting 
values on each side of the singular surface d: 
d~+ dxk a~- dxk 
-([l = 0" \1! + dT, -ii1 = 0" \1!- dT. (175.1) 
Subtracting the second of these equations from the first yields 
d dxk [ dx"] dY[Wl=[o"wl----;a= a"wdr · (175.2) 
The entire differential theory of singular surfaces grows from applications of 
this formula, which asserts that the fump of a tangential derivative is the tangential 
derivative of the fump. Since the values of \1! in ßi+ and f,i- are in general entirely 
unrelated to one another, the limiting values of the normal derivatives of \1! on 
the two sides of the singular surface need be connected in no way: 
[ ::] is unrestricted. ( 175.3) 
To express the fact that the discontinuity is spread out smoothly over a surface 
of exactly n - m dimensions, not isolated upon a surface of lower dimension 
nor varying abruptly from one part of d to another, we need only apply (175.2) 
to n - m independent families of curves upon d. If we choose these as co-ordinate 
curves vr = const, we have 
(175.4) 
494 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 17 5. 
Equations (175.3) and (175.4) are the superficial conditions of compatibility. 
Like HADAMARD's lemma, from which they follow at once, they presuppose no 
geometry in the space. 
In the important special case when W is continuous, or, more generally, 
when [W] =const, from (175.4) we obtain 
[okW] x7r= o. (175.5) 
Thus [ ok W] lies in the manifold normal to (J. If the dimension of (J is but one 
less than that of the space, there is but one linearly independent normal vector, 
which may be selected asthat given by taking n-N =1 in (App.19.4). Therefore 
(175.6) 
where B is a factor of proportionality. 
We have intentionally kept the argument on the highest level of generality. 
As soon as geometrical structure is introduced, more explicit formulae become 
possible. In an affine space, for the jump of a tensor W we have the following 
important identity valid when W is continuous or when W is a scalar and [W] = 
const: 
(175.7) 
since W k- ok W is a continuous quantity. In a metric space, we may introduce 
the unÜ normal n and evaluate explicitly the factor B in ( 175 .6), so obtaining 
Maxwell's theorem1 : When [W] = 0, or when W is a scalar and [W] = const, then 
[W,k] = Bnk, B =[nkokW] =[nkW,k] = [~~]. (175.8) 
We now consider applications to vector fields in the space of three dimensions. 
Generalization to tensor fields in n-dimensional spaces is immediate and is left 
to the reader. 
If we take W =C, a vector, (175.8) becomes 
[ck,,J = Bknm, Bk= [nmck,m] = [::J · (175.9) 
Hence 
[curlc] = nxB, [div c] = n · B, B = n[div c]- nx[curlc]. (175.10) 
These formulae embody Weingarten's jirst theorem 2 : The longitudinal and 
transversal iumps of the gradient of a continuous vector are the iumps of its divergence and curl, respectively. It follows as a corollary that the only possible jump 
in the gradient of a continuous lamellar field is normal; of a continuous solenoidal 
field, transversal. 
Results concerning the jump of the field itself can be inferred by assuming 
a representation in terms of a continuous potential. First, suppose we have a 
lamellar field c = - grad P with a potential P [ cf. (App. 3 3 .2) J which is continuous 
or suffers a constant jump on the singular surface. It is but reinterpretation of 
MAXWELL's theorem (175.8) to say that only the normal component c" can suffer 
a jump; the tangential component must be continuous 3• Second, suppose we 
1 [1873. 5, § 78] [1881, 4, § 78a]. Cf. also WEINGARTEN [1901, 15]. HADAMARD [1903, 11, 
~ 73] called the result "the identical conditions". MAXWELL seems to have been the first 
to derive compatibility conditions by differentiating a jump relation along a path lying on 
a surface. 
2 [1901, 15]. 3 MAXWELL [1873, 5, § 78] [1881, 4, § 78a], FERRARIS [1897, 2, ~ 42]. This seems tobe 
the content of the obscure statements and proofs of BROCA [1899. 2], [1900, 2]. 
Sect. 175. Superficial and geometrical conditions of compatibility. 495 
have a solenoidal field c = curl v with a solenoidal vector potential v which is 
continuous or has a constant jump on the surface. From (175.10) we have at 
once [c] =[curl v] =nXB, and therefore [cn] =0. That is, only the tangential 
component nxc can suffer a jump; the normal component must be continuousl. 
These results are used frequently in electromagnetism. 
In a metric space, the more general conditions (175.4) and (175.3), which do 
not presuppose [W] =const, can be included in a single formula, which we now 
derive for the case of a surface in three-dimensional space. W e simply multiply 
both sides of ( 175 .4) by au x'('.1, use the identity (App. 21.4h, and obtain 
[BkW] = [n"' B ... W] nk + gk",aux'('.1 Br[W],} 
[W ,k] = [n"'W ,".] nk + gkma.1F x~[W];r. (175.11) 
where for the second form W is assumed tobe a tensor, and the sernicolon denotes 
the total covariant derivative defined in Sect. App. 20. These geometrical conditions 
of compatibility 2 are no more than formal alternative expressions of the validity 
of (175.4) for two independent families of curves upon d. Indeed, taking the 
scalar product of (175.11h first by nk and then by ~r yields (175-3) and (175.4). 
An easy calculation using (175.11) and (App. 21.3) 2 yields the following identity 
for the magnitudes of the jumps: 
[W ,k] [W·k] =[nk W ,k]2 + [W];r[Wlr, (175.12} 
which might easily have been predicted from our remarks above concerning the 
nature of the geometrical conditions. In the case when W is continuous, by comparing (175.12) with (175.8) we obtain 
[W ,k][W ,k] = B2, or I BI = j[W ,k]j. (175.13) 
While we have written these last two results in notations appropriate only when 
W is a scalar, results of the same kind hold when W is a tensor of any order. 
There is a curious special condition of compatibility which is more easily derived directly 
than by application of the above results and those in the next section. For any vector field c 
in !Jl+-, we begin with the identity 
dck = {c(k,r) - (pq - P(nl (c(k, r),q- c(q,r),k)} d xk + } 
+ d {c[k,q] (pq- P(n)}, (175.14) 
where p and P(I) are the position vectors of a variable and a fixed point on the curve along 
which dc is calculated, so that dp = d;E, dp(1)= o. By HADAMARD's Iemma, this identity 
still holds for a curve on the + side of d, provided all the covariant derivatives be interpreted 
as limit values from the + side. We now consider the special case when c(k m) and c(~ m) p 
are continuous across d, while ck and c[k m] may suffer jump discontinuities. 'By writing an 
identity of the type (175-14) for each side of the surface and subtracting the results, we obtain 
(175.15) 
Integrating from some point P(o) to P(I) on d, and then dropping the subscript {1), we obtain 
[ck] = [ck]o + [c[k,qj]o (pq- P(o> l, } 
[c] = [c]0 + t[curl c]0 X (p- P(o)l · (175.16) 
1 FERRARIS [1897, 2, 'I! 55], with an inadequate proof. A result of this kind had been given 
by HELMHOLTZ [1858, 1, § 4]. 2 As has been remarked by KoTcHINE [1926, 3, § 1] these conditions are included, if 
not very obviously, in much more general ones given by CouLON [1902, 3, §§ 3, 8, 46]. They 
were rediscovered by THOMAS [1957, 1.5, § 3]. The elegant formal proof in the text is due to 
KANWAL [1958, 5, § 5]. 
496 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The C!assical Field Theories. Sect. 176. 
These formulae express Weingarten's second theorem1 : The discontinuity of a vector field 
c across a surface whe~e C(k, m) and C(k,m),p are continuous is determined, ~s a function of position 
upon the surface, by ~ts value and the value of [curl c] at any one po~nt. The theorem arose 
in the context of small displacement and small strain (Sect. 58). So interpreted, it asserts 
that a displacement corresponding to continuous strain and continuous strain gradient can 
suffer at most a discontinuity corresponding to a rigid motion of the material on one side 
of d with respect to that on the other. 
The more general problern of characterizing those discontinuities of a vector c across 
which C(k,m) is continuous is easily settled2• By (175.11) 2 we have 
[c(k,m)] = [nf> n(k Cm),p] + xfLI aLIF gp(k[Cm)];r. 
By (App. 21.3) 2 it follows that 
[ nknm C(k, m)] is unrestricted, l 
2 [c(k,m)] nk x7A = [nk c",, k] x7A + nk[ck];LI, 
[c(k,m)] X~Lf x~ = [ck]; (LI x~A) · 
(175.17) 
(175.18) 
These formulae express the resolution of (175.17) into normal and tangential components. 
Therefore, necessary and sufficient conditions that [c(k,m)] = 0 are 
[n"n"'c(k,m)] = 0, l 
[nk Cm,k] x7A + nk [ck];.d = 0, 
[ck];(LI x7A) = 0. 
(175.19) 
These conditions do not suffice for the truth of WEINGARTEN's result ( 1 7 5 .16), which presumes 
that [ c(k, m), q] = 0 as weil. 
176. Iterated geometrical conditions of compatibility. Since the geometrical 
conditions of compatibility (175.11) are mere identities resolving the jump of 
an arbitrary derivative into the jump of the normal derivative and the tangential 
derivatives of the jump of the function, it is clear that iteration will yield an 
expression for the jump of the second derivatives, [okom W], in terms of the 
values of 
[W], a;, [WJ, 
and of the geometry of the singular surface. An analogous result holds for 
the derivatives of any order. This was perceived by HADAMARD 3 and applied 
in special cases; the general reduction for the second derivatives in a Euclidean 
space of three dimensions was worked out by THOMAS 4, whose analysis 
we present now. It is possible, but cumbrous, to carry through the work using 
partial derivatives, but an elegant form results if we suppose W to be a tensor 
and employ covariant derivatives throughout. 
Writing 
A-[W], Ak = [W k], l 
B=Akn"=[n"W,k]: Bk-[W,km]n"', 
C Bßnk=[n"n"' W,km], 
(176.1) 
1 [1901, 15]. The proof is a simplified versionofthat given by CESARO [1906, 2]. The 
original treatment and those in textbooks do not make it sufficiently clear that C(k,m) q is 
assumed to be continuous. As may be seen from the formulae of the next section, it is only 
this assumption that makes so definite a conclusion possible. 2 The problern is related to one solved by SoMIGLIANA [1914, 11, § II], who considered 
the case when c(k m) is the strain tensor of a linearly elastic equilibrated body. The continuity 
of the stress vector, as required by (205.5), implies that (175.19h 2 are satisfied, so that only 
( 17 5.19)3 remains, and this is SoMIGLIANA's result. ' 3 [1903, 11, '1['1[119-120]. 4 [1957, 15, § 5]. Much more general results are given in schematic form by CouLON 
[1902, 3, §§ 4, 46]. 
Sect. 176. Iterated geometrical conditions of compatibility. 497 
from (175.11) 2 we have 
['V,k] =Bnk+gkma"'rx~A;r=Ak,} (176.2) ['V,kml = B",nk + gkpa"'r xfAAm;r· 
Since the left-hand side of (176.2) 2 is symmetric in the indices k and m, it follows that 
B", nk + gkp a"'r xfAAm;r= Bk n", +gmp a"'r xfAAk;r. 
Taking the scalar product of this equation by n yields 
B",= Cn", +g",pa"'rxf"' nkAk;r, 
where we have used (App.21.3) 2 and (176.1) 6 • 
From (176.1) 2 and (176.2)1 we have at once 
(176.3) 
(176.4) 
Ak;r = (Bnk+gkma"'Ax?'AA;A);r= (Bnk);r+gk",aAA (x?'AA;A);r. (176.5) 
By use of (App. 21.6)t, 2 follows 
Ak;r = nk B;r- gkp bj. xf"' B + gkm aLIA x~ A; Ar+ nk bj.A ;A. (176.6) 
Hence by use of (App.21.3) 2 we have 
nk Ak;r = B;r+ bj.A;A· (176.7) 
Substituting from (176.7) into (176.4) and then putting the result and (176.6) 
into (176.2)z, we obtain THOMAs's iterated geometrical condition of compatibility: 
['V ,km]= Cnk n", + 2n(kgm)p a"'r xf"' (B;r+ br.z: aiA A;A) + ) 
+ gkpgmqxf"' x!ra"'A ari(A;(IA)- bxA B) • (176.8) 
= Cnknm+ 2 n<kx",{(B;r+ b'J.A;A) + x<kt x",);A(A;<u>- brAB). 
The scalar product of (176.8) 2 by gkm, simplified by use of (App.21.33) 2 , 
(App.19.7), and (App.21.10) 6, becomes 
['V•k,k] = C +A;~r-KB = [~ n~] + ['V];~r- K [ ~:], (176.9) 
which may be set side by side with (175.12). 
While the simple condition of compatibility (175.11), or (176.2}1 , expresses 
the 3 jumps ['V,k] in terms of the 3 quantities Band A;r defined on the surface, 
the iterated condition (176.8) is in a measure redundant, since it expresses the 
6 jumps ['V,k",] in terms of the 9 surface quantities C, B, B;r• A;A• and A;(I<t>)· 
Since, however, the 3 quantities A;A and Bare determined by A;(I<t>) and B;r• 
there are but 6 independent jumps, as expected. Conditions of this kind, being 
pure identities, merely rearrange the variables. Only when they are used in 
connection with some further hypothesis, such that some particular quantity 
is continuous, may fruit be gotten from them. 
In the important special case when both 'V and 'V k are continuous1, so that 
A = B = 0, ( 176.8) reduces to the form 2 ' 
['V,k",] = [oko",'V] = Cnkn",, } (176.10) C = [nPnq 'V,pq] = [nPnq op oq'V] = ['V,j,P]. 
1 If we suppose merely that ~ ,k is continuous and [~];r= O, we obtain 
[~,kml = Cnknm, C = [nknm~,km], 
but not all the other forms included in ( 1 76.10) remain necessarily valid. 
2 HADAMARD (1901, 8, § 1], (1903, 11, ~ 74]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 32 
498 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 177. 
More generally1, if \V and its derivatives of orders 1, 2, ... , p -1 are continuous, 
we have 
[w,,.,,. •... ,."J = [8,., 8,., ... 8,." w], 
= [n"'' n1111 ••• n"'P 81111 8m, ..• 81111> \V] nk, nk, ... nkp> 
= [n""n"" ... n"'P \V, 11111111 ••• mp] nk, nk, ... nkp, (176.11) 
{
[\V•"'•,..,,'"'',m, .. .'"'~'r',..."r,] n,., n,., ... n,." if p is even 
= [nq \V•"'• ·"'• •"'IP-•>I•q] n,. n,. ... n,. if p is odd. ,m1 •"'•··· 1 t p 
That is, the jumps in all the p! derivatives of p-th order are determined uniquely 
by the jump in the completely normal p-th derivative and by the unit normal n. 
By using an argumentsuch asthat leading to (175.8), we see that (176.11) holds 
in a metric space of any dimension; a corresponding generaliiation of (175.6) 
holds in any kind of space, irre~pective of what geometrical structute it may 
have. 
A second iteration would enable us to derive a general resolution of [IV,,...,p] 
in the Euclidean three-dimensional case, but the formal complexities encountered 
in deriving ( 176.8) render the details of such an analysis forbidding and the 
result too complicated to be useful. 
II. The motion of surfaces. 
177. The speed of displacement and the normal velocity of a moving surface. 
Consider a family of surfaces given by 
:xJ = :xJ (V, t) , (177.1) 
where V stands for a pair of surface parameters VLI identifying what we shall 
call a surface point. V, in general, is not to be confused with a material particle 
of any motion that may be occurring; indeed, the considerations in this section 
should be regarded as independent of the motion of substances, although as an 
aid to visualization it is often convenient to picture the moving surface as consisting of identifiable particles. The representation (177.1) gives the places :xJ 
occupied by the surface point V as the time t progresses; thus it describes the 
motion of a surface. The velocity of the surface point V is defined by 
az I 
U = Tt V=const' (177.2) 
If we eliminate the parameters V, we may write (177.1) in the form 
f(:IJ,t) =0. (177.3) 
Conversely, however, from a spatial representation (177.3) it is not possible 
to calculate a unique form {177.1). This is easy to understand: Given a moving 
surface, there are infinitely many ways of identifying the points on its successive 
configurations in such a way that all those configurations are swept out smoothly 
by the surface points constituting any one of them. 
Supposing, now, that we have any one parametrization (177.1), by differentiating (177.3) with respect tot we get 
at ae+u·grad/=0. (177.4) 
1 CouLON [1902, 3, § 46], HADAMARD [1903, 11, '1174]. Contrary to the implication of 
THOMAS [1957. 15, § 1], the analysis of HADAMARD is not restricted to any special choice of 
CO-ordinates. 
Sect. 177. The speed of displacement and the normal velocity of a moving surface. 499 
Writing n for the unit normal to the surface, by (177.4) we have 
Of 
grad t ot 
Un=U·n=U· !gradfl =- V f,k ,,k ' (177-5) 
since the right member is determined by the spatial equation (177-3) alone, it 
is independent of our choice of the parametrization (177.1). That is, alt possible 
velocities u of the moving surface have the same normal component un, which is 
called the speed of displacement of the surface1. Cf. Sect. 74. 
For some purposes it is convenient to make the particular choice of surface 
points implied by requiring u to be normal to the surface; 
( 177.6) 
This velocity will be called the normal velocity of the surface. The identification 
of surface points may be visualized by erecting normal vectors of magnitude un dt 
from each: point on the configuration of the surface at some one time t; the 
termini of these vectors then sweep out the configuration at time t +dt. When 
un = f(t), the surfaces so generated are parallel surfaces. 
Suppose now that we have any parametrization 
X =X (v, t) ( 177.7) 
which is consistent with (177.3). Then both of these equations may be used simultaneously, so that (177.3) becomes f(x(v, t), t) =0. Differentiation with respect 
to t yields of oxk . 
Te+ l,k8t = o. (177.8) 
From (177.5) it follows that 
{177.9) 
Conversely, (177.5) follows from (177.9), so that these two equations furnish 
equivalent definitions of the speed of displacement according as the representation (177.3) or (177.7) for the surface is preferred. 
The parameter v in (177.7) may, but need not, be identified with what was 
called a surface point V above. In any case, given a particular parametrization 
(177.7), an observer moving with the velocity (177.6), which we have called the 
normal velocity of the surface, will encounter points on the surface (177.7) having 
surface co-ordinates v which vary in time. Their rates of change ur, which 
we shall call the tangential velocity of the parametrization, may be calculated 2• 
Such a velocity must satisfy 
oxk r . .k - k 81 + u X";"r- unn . (177.10) 
Taking the scalar product first by nk and then by gkmx7'LI yields (177.9) and 3 
(177.11) 
l This quantity was introduced by STOKES [1848, 4, p. 353], who called it "the speed of 
propagation"; cf. also KELVIN [1848, .5]; for general surfaces it first appears, unnamed, 
in the work of CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, § 1]; also HUGONIOT [1885, J, p. 1120] first called it 
"vitesse de propagation" but immediately thereafter [1885, 4, p. 1231] distinguished "deux 
vitesses de Propagation", the other being that we consider in Sect. 183. The term "vitesse de 
deplacement de l'onde" was introduced by HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 1], [1903, 11, ~ 100]. 2 THOMAS [1957, 1.5, Eqs. (52) to (54)]. 
3 Cf. ( 177.2). Eq. ( 177 .10) thus furnishes a resolution of the particular choice of surface 
velocity specified by ( 1 77 .6). 
500 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 178. 
Conversely, if we choose to define un and ur by (177.9) and (177.11), we have 
by (App. 21.4h 
oxk r k - ()zk rLl oxP m _ _k ) 
-----;)~ + u X; r - -----;)~ - a gp m ----a"t X; Ll x;-r 
(177.12) - oxk oxP ( mk m k) - -----;)~- gpm ----a"t g - n n , 
whence (177.10) follows. A necessary and sufficient condition that the parameter v correspond to a surface point V for the normal motion (177.6) is Ur=O. 
178. Differential description of a moving surface1• Supposing that a, b, un, 
and ur are given as functions of v and t, we ask if there exists a representation 
(177.7) suchthat these quantities belong to it. In other words, in order to define 
a moving surface does it suffice to assign as functions of t and the parameters v 
its first and second forms, its speed of displacement, and the tangential velocity 
of the parametrization? The answer, in general, is negative. In addition to the 
Eqs. (App. 21.8) of MAINARDI-CODAZZI and GAUSS, it is necessary that other conditions of compatibility be satisfied. 
First we differentiate (177.11), obtaining 
( ox~Ll m + oxk m ) Ur;Ll =- gkm Be X;r -----;)~ X;rLJ · (178.1) 
By (App.19.7) and (App. 21.6h it follows that 
oarLl b -o-t-+2u(r;Ll>=- 2un rLJ· (178.2) 
From the definition of the total covariant der~vative it is easy to verify that 
( oxk;r) = ox~rLl ~ ~{A} ot ;Ll ot + ;A ot Llr · (178.3) 
By (App.19.6h we then have 
(178.4) 
We now differentiate (177.9) and by use of (178.4), (App.21.6) 2 , (App.21.7h, 
(App.21.6)1 , (177.11), (177.9), and (App.19.7) obtain 
oxk OX~Ll) OX~rLl Un;rLJ = nk;I'Ll-----;)1 + 2nk;(r-8-t-+ nk-8-t -, 
OXk (bA m +bAb m) = -gkm -----;se r;LI X; A r ALl n -
A 0 X~ Ll) 0 ( k b ) - 2gkmx~Abcr- ~+nkßt n rLI, 
(178.5) 
- bA bA b - bA oaLI)A obrLI -UA r;LI-un r ALl (r-o-t-+-8-t-. 
From (App. 21.8)1 and (178.2) it follows that 
obrLI Ab bA bAb - 0-t-+u FLI;A+ (I'ULI);A=Un;rLl-Un r ALl· (178.6) 
1 The results ( 178.2) and ( 178.6), though not the proofs given here, were disclosed to us 
by J.L. ERICKSEN. 
Sect. 179. The displacement derivative. 501 
Equations ( 178.2) and ( 178.6) are conditions of compatibility to be satisfied 
by a, b, un, and ur. ERICKSEN has shown that conversely, if the quantities 
a, b, un, and ur satisfy (App. 21.8), {178.2), and (178.6), then they are derivable from 
a relation of the form {177.7) with an assigned spatial metric g; that is, the conditions of compatibility here derived are also sufficient for the existence of a 
moving surface. Therefore any other condition satisfied by a, b, un, and ur will 
be a consequence of the relations already derived. 
179. The displacement derivative. Given a function F(v, t) defined upon the 
moving surface, its rate of change tJFjtJt as apparent to an observer moving with 
the normal velocity (177.6) of the surface is1 
!_!___=~+ ro F IJt at u r ' (179.1) 
where ur is the tangential velocity of the parametrization, given by (177.11). 
Suppose that G(x, t) be a function such that on the surface j we have G(x (v, t) t) = 
F(v, t). Then aF ac axk -81 = 81 +-8TokG, 8rF=x7rokG. {179.2) 
Hence by (177.10) we have 
( 179-3) 
If Fand G are tensors, tJFjtJt and tJGjbt as defined by (179.1) and (179-3) 3 
generally fail to be tensors. For a double tensor WL:~~·.:·.~(x, v, t), we define 
the displacement derivative (Jd 'l! jbt as that double tensor under the group of 
transformations x*=x*(x), v*=v*(v, t) which reduces to bWjbt when the spatial co-ordinates arereetangular Cartesian and the tangential velocity ur vanishes. 
To calculate (Jd lj! JM, we first introduce the "Lie derivative" f: lj! when any spatial 
indices of 'l! or dependence of 'l! upon x is ignored, viz. " 
f: lj!k ... mr ... Ll _ u<~> 0 lj!k ... mr ... Ll _ lj!k ... m<P ... Ll 0 ur_ ... + u p ... q A ... z:- q, p ... q A ... l: p ... q A ... l: <P I 
+ lj!k ... mr ... Ll 0 u<~> + .. . p ... q <P ••• l: A ' 
_ u<~> lj!k ... m r ... Ll lj!k ... m <P ... Ll ur + - p ... q A ... l:, <P- p ... q A ... l: , q, - ''' 
+ lj!k ... mr ... A u<~> + .. . p ... q <~> ... r ,A · 
( 179.4) 
Then we have 
{179.5) 
where both x and v are held constant when olj!jot is calculated. Forthis formula 
to be meaningful, it is not necessary to use any equation x = x (v, t) for the 
surface whose normal and tangential velocities are un n and ur. To verify its 
correctness, however, let us eliminate x; by {177.10) we have 
~ 
bd '*' - aw ( oxk r k ) - 81 +w,k at+u x;r +;w, 
= !'*'_ + oxk oklj! + ~_x~ [wq ... { p} + ... ] + t:w +urx~r'l! at at at ... k q .. , , k' {179.6) 
= -~j + fW + ~ [wq ... { P} + ... ]. ot V=COnst U Ot ... k q . ------
1 This definition, stated in words by HAYES [1957, 7, p. 595], seems to give the sense 
intended also by THOMAS [1957, 15, § 4]. 
502 C. TRUESDELL and Ro TouPrN: The Classical Field Theorieso Secto 179° 
where ~ IV is obtained by replacing " ~" by "0 ~" in ( 179.4) 2 o When ur= 0 and .. ' ' 
the spatial co-ordinates arereetangular Cartesian, by (179.6)3 and (17901) we have 
d~: = ~~~v=const = ~~ · (179.7) 
Since the right-hand side of (179o5) is a double tensor under transformations 
~· =~* (~). v* =v* (v, t), it fumishes the required expression for the displacementderivative in all co-ordinates systems. 
Fora spatial tensor IV~:::;'(~. t), (17905) reduces to 
Öd't' i.l't' " -Ü- = -fJt- + IV,k Un n , (179°8) 
and it is this form that is most useful. 
From (179.8) we have at once 
ddgkm = 00 
t5t ' (179°9) 
hence raising and lowering of spatial indices commutes with tJdjllto Not so, however 
with surface indices, for the conditions of compatibility (17802) and (17806) 
assume the forms 
(179o10) 
By differentiating the relation ar.:~ a.:!A =ll'J. we see that (179o10h is equivalent to 
ddar.d - + 2 br.:! dt - Un • (179°11) 
Also Öda - Te=-2UnaK, (179.12) 
whence it follows that tJdajtJt =0 is a necessary and sufficient condition that a 
moving surface be and remain a minimal surface. 
From (179.11) and (179o10) 2 we have 
~ ddb~ --Un ;r ;.1 + Un br.:! b A.d> l 
Ödbr.d - ;r.d+ 3 v.:~ b.:! - 15-t-- Un Un A• 
(179°13) 
From these results and (Appo 21.10) it is easy to show that 
~ ödR (K-2 K) + or =Un -2 Un;r' , 
~ 
ddK- KK-+ (K- r.:~ br.:!) -Un a - Un;r.:J, (179.14) 
ddb - - ~ =-UnaK K + a(K ar.:~_ bF.:!) Un;r.d· 
ddnk We now calculate 1 ~· From the relations (Appo 19.6)1 and (App.21.3)1 it 
follows that 
(179.15) 
1 The result is stated by HAYES [1957, 7, Eqo (22)] without proof; a proof different from 
ours is given by THOMAS [1957, 15, Eqo (60)]o 
Sect. 180. Kinematical condition of compatibility. 503 
By differentiating (177.9) we obtain 
(179.16) 
where we have used (177.10), (App.19.6) 1 , and (179.15) 3 . Since (177.9) presumes 
that X =X (v, t), the time derivative ojot is taken Oll the understanding that X 
is eliminated. Hence 
Ar k A q p bE r A k ( kq k q) 0 n,l ) a X;AUn;r=U gqpX;AX;E ra X;A- g -n n 81-, 
~ k ( 179.17) - A bA k un -U AX;A-7)t• . 
where we have used (App.21.6b (App.21.4) 1 , (App.19.7), and (179.15) 1 . By 
(A pp. 21.6h it follows that 
( 179.18) 
where, as stated above, x has been eliminated before onkjot is calculated. By 
use of (179.6) 2 we thus obtain the desired formula: 
(179.19) 
For an alternative derivation, we may suppose that ur= 0 and the spatial Coordinates are reetangular Cartesian; most of the terms in the above calculations 
are then absent, and we quickly obtain a formula recognizable as the appropriate 
special case of ( 179.19), which is a tensorial equation. 
From (179.19) and (App.19.7) we have 
( 179.20) 
a result that might have been expected directly from the definitions, since it 
asserts that the length of the projection of the displacement derivative of the 
normal onto a given direction on the surface is just the negative of the gradient 
of the speed of displacement in that direction. In particular, a necessary and 
sufficient condition for parallel propagation is un = f (t), as was already remarked 
in Sect. 177. 
III. Kinematics of singular surfaces. 
180. Kinematical condition of compatibility. We now consider a moving 
surface d (t) which divides a varying region Bi+ (t) from another, :?~- (t). The 
moving surface is assumed to satisfy the conditions stated in Sect. 177 and at 
each instant t to be a singular surface with respect to a quantity \V, as defined 
in Sect. 173; the conditions laid down for \V are now supposed to hold for each t. 
Assuming also that the limiting values \V+ and \V- are continuously differentiable 
functions oft in Bi+ and &l-, respectively, we derive a condition that the discontinuity in \V persists in time rather than appearing and disappearing at some 
particular instant. 
In a general space this temporal persistency is expressed by superficial conditions analogaus to those discussed in Sect. 175 but applied when one more 
dimension, that of t, is added both to the surface and to the space in which it 
504 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 180. 
lies, i.e., we need only regard f(~, t) =0 as a single surface in the ~-t-space. In 
this degree of generality, nothing new results. 
In a metric space, however, the existence of a definite speed of displacement 
un for the moving surface makes possible results of a more concrete kind. The 
essential step, again, is fumished by HADAMARD's lemma (174.1), butthistime 
we apply it to a particular tangential path on the n-dimensional surface f (~, t) = 0 
in the n + 1-dimensional ~-t-space, namely, the path tangent to the vector un n, 1. 
The derivative 1 on the + side of the surface is the quantity öw+Jöt as defined 
by (179.1). Thus 
(180.1) 
where, as in previous formulae, okw+=(okw)+. Writing a similar equation for 
the other side of the surface and subtracting the result from ( 180.1), we obtain 
the kinematical condition of compatibility 2 : 
[~~] = -un[nkokW] + :t [W]. (180.2) 
The jumps occurring on the right-hand side are those occurring also in the geometrical conditions (175.11). Thus the fumps of the derivatives 8kW and 8Wf8t 
across a persistent singular surface are determined by the quantities un, [ nk 8k W], 
and [W]. 
A condition equivalent to (180.2) but expressed in terms of tensors is easy 
to obtain by using the displacement derivative (179.5). Considering a spatial 
tensor field W k.. · m we ha ve p ... q ' 
[o'ii] _ k t:5d 8t --un[n W,k] +Tt[W]. (180.3) 
This is so because ( 1) it is a tensorial equation and (2) when the spatial co-ordinates 
are reetangular Cartesian, it reduces to (180.2). 
In the important special case when W is continuous, (180.2) reduces to the 
form 
( 180.4) 
Thus, in particular, across a stationary surface that is singular with respect to 
8k W but not with respect to W, the time derivative 8W Jot is · continuous, as is 
evident also directly from the definitions. 
We may write (175.8) and (180.4) as the system 
[W,k] = Bnk, [~~] =- unB. (180.5) 
1 There are n independent paths at any one point of d (I). but we use only a particular 
one. If all n are employed, we may derive the geometrical and kinematical conditions of 
compatibility simultaneously, as is done in a special case by HADAMARD [1903, 11, "if97] 
and more generally by CouLON [1902, 3, § 46]. We prefer separate treatment of the two sets 
of conditions so as to separate the underlying ideas. In many cases useful in continuum 
mechanics, the geometrical conditions are satisfied when the kinematical is not; e.g., at the 
instant a portion of material splits in two, or two parts are joined together. 2 The essential content of this condition seems to be contained in the "phoronomic 
conditions" of CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, § 7], but these are not easy to use, and certainly the 
general concept of compatibility is due to HUGONIOT. First [1885, 3, p. 1119] he used "propagation" to mean compatibility, but soon thereafter [1887, 1, §§ 3. 5] he introduced the terms 
"compatibilite" and "conditions de compatibilite". HADAMARD [1903, 11, "if97] and LovE 
[1904, 4, § 7] obtained the system (180.5); HADAMARD's term is "conditions de compatibilite 
cinematique". The full condition (180.2) is implied by the results of CouLON [1902, 3, § 46]; 
cf. also KorcHINE [1926, 3, § 1]. Our presentation follows THOMAS [1957. 15, § 4]. 
Sect. 181. Iterated kinematical conditions of compatibility. 505 
Of all the forms of the conditions of compatibility, it is these, which presume W 
itself to be continuous, that are most often used. If we square (180.5) 2 and use 
(175.13)1 , we obtain1 ~] 2 _ 2 2 _ 2 ,k 
[ at - un B - un [W,,.][W ], (180.6) 
whereby the magnitude of the speed of displacement is shown to be the quotient 
of the magnitude of the jump in 8Wj8t by the magnitude of the jump in W k· 
This last result is expressed in terms and notations appropriate to the case wh~n 
W is a scalar, but generalization is easy. 
Since HuGONIOT's time 2 it has been stated that a singular surface upon which 
the kinematical condition of compatibility does not hold will instantly split into 
two or more singular surfaces or will become singular with respect to a different 
quantity, such as a derivative of W. To substantiate a statement of this kind, 
the theory of some particular material is needed. In the generality maintained 
here, all that can be said is that the singular surface will not persist. 
181. Iterated kinematical conditions of compatibility. Amplifying the notations (176.1), set · 
=[~;], B1=[n,.a;;k]. (181.1) 
We may then write (180.3) in the form 
A l 
=- B 6dA ( ) Un +~· 181.2 
By replacing W by 8Wj8t in (176.2h and (181.2) we obtain 
[ ----a"t aw, k] -
_ BI n,. + g,.ma 4 X;4 ;r• r m A 1 l 
[ß2'l/] 1 ddA (181.3) ---ai2 = - Un B + (ft . 
By (181.2), the quantity A 1 is already expressed in terms of A and B. We 
now obtain a like expression for B1 • To this end, we differentiate (176.1) 3 and 
use ( 176.2)1 , obtaining 
ddB _ 4 r m A '6dnk + k 6d['ll,k] (181.4) 6t - g,.ma X;4 ;r 6t n 6t • 
Now by another application of the argument leading to (180.1) we can show that 
:t (o,.w+)=(:t akwf+unnmomakw+, (181.5) 
since the various derivatives are assumed continuous in f!Jt+; consistently with 
our practice, we have put 8m8kW+=(8m8kW)+. Hence 
6d - [aw,k] m[ Tt[W,k]- 8t- +unn W,mkl· (181.6) 
Substitution of this result into (181.4) yields a result which when simplified by 
use of (176.1) 6, (181.3) 1 and (App.21.3) 2 becomes 
BI_ C 6dB 6dnk 4r m A ) --Un +~-gkm~a X;4 ;F• 
=-unC+~~ +un;rA;r• 
where the latter form follows by use of (179.19). 
1 DUHEM [1900, 3]. 
2 [1887, 1, § 14]. Cf. HADAMARD [1903, 11, 'if 108]. 
(181.7) 
506 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 182. 
The identities (181.3), with A' and B' replaced by right-hand sides of (181.2) 
and (181.7), are THOMAs's iterated kinematical conditions of compatibility 1• 
In the case when \V is continuous, we have A = 0, and the conditions ( 181.3) 
reduce to the simpler forms 
( 181.8) 
When not only \V but also o\Vfot and ok\V are 
still simpler, for (181.8) and (176.10) yield 2 
continuous, the results are 
where 
[okom\V] =[\V,km] =Cnknm, l [a~kt\V] = [a;;k] = -unCnk, 
[~~~] = u~C, 
(181.9) 
(181.10) 
More generally3, if \V and all its derivatives of orders 1, 2, ... , p- 1 are 
continuous, we have 
[ok, ok, ... ok, otP-s 0P-s \V] = [ otP-s 0P-s \V,k,k, ... k,] l 
(181.11) = (- un)P-s [nm, nm, ... nmp om, o~, ... omp \V] nk, nk, ... nk,, 
= (- un)P-s [nm, nm• ... nmp \V ,m,m, ... mp] nk, nk, ... nk,, 
the result being valid in any metric space. In particular, choosing s =0 we have 
(181.12) 
interpretation of which yields the Hugoniot-Duhem theorem4 : The speed of 
displacement of a singular surface across which \V and its derivatives of orders 
1, 2, ... , p -1 are continuous but at least one p-th derivative of \V is discontinuous 
is determined up to sign by the ratio of the jump of (}P \V/ o tP to that of the fully normal 
p-th derivative, dPWfdnP. 
IV. Singular surfaces associated with a motion. 
182. Material and spatial representations of a surface. So far in this chapter 
our considerations have been independent of the motion of any material medium. 
We now suppose that a medium consisting of particles Xis in motion through 
the space of places x according to (66.1). For the time being, we shall assume 
1 [1957, 15, § 6]. THOMAS obtains also an alternative form for orA'; see his Eq. (51) as 
corrected. As regards the history of these conditions, remarks similar to those at the beginning 
of Sect. 176 may be made. 2 HUGONIOT [1885, 4, p. 1231], HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 2]. 3 DuHEM [1901, 6], CouLoN [1902, 3, § 46], HADAMARD [1903, 11, '1!97]. 
'Given in the special cases P=1 and P=2 by HUGONIOT [1885, 3, p.1120] [1885, 4, 
p. 1231], in general by DuHEM [1900, 3] [1901, 7, Part II, Chap. li, § 2], but expressed by 
means of Laplacians (cf. (176.11) and (181.10)) rather than normal derivatives. 
Sect. 182. Material and spatial representations of a surface. 507 
that the functions occurring in (66.1) are single-valued and continuous; modifications appropriate to motions suffering discontinuities will be given in Sect. 185. 
We consider a surface d(t), given by a representation of the form (177.3). and 
we set F(X, t) = f(x(X, t), t), so that f(x, t) = F(X(x, t), t), (182.1) 
identically in x, X, and t. Alternative representations of the moving surface 
are thus 1 
f(x,t)=O, F(X, t) = 0. (182.2) 
In the latter representation, which we denote by Y (t), we may conceive the 
particles as stationary and the surface Y (t) moving amongst them, being occupied by a different set of particles at each timet. The two representatives (182.2) 
are the duals of one another in the sense of Sect. 14. The analysis given earlier 
in this chapter did not presuppose any particular choice of Co-ordinates, so long 
as they be independent of time, and is equally applicable to both representations. 
It is easier to visualize in terms of the spatial variables x, t, and from now on 
we agree to regard all the foregoing equations as so expressed; where we wish 
to employ a material counterpart, we shall invoke the principle of duality. 
Thus in the special case when ( 182.2)1 reduces to the form 
f(x) = 0, (182.3) 
weshall say that the surface d is stationary; when (182.2) 2 reduces to the form 
F(X) = 0, (182.4) 
that Y is material 2 [cf. (73.4)]. In the former case, the surface consists always 
of the same places; in the latter, of the same particles. 
Although (182.2)1 and (182.2h are but different means of representing the 
same phenomenon, the two surfaces so defined are, in general, entirely different 
from one another geometrically. The surface f(x, t) =0 is a surface in the space 
of places, while the surface F(X, t) = 0 is the locus, in the space of particles, of 
the initial positions of the particles X that are situate upon the surface f (x, t) = 0 
at time t. Such connections as there are must be established by use of the transformations (182.1). For example, from the assumption that f(x, t) =0 has a 
continuous normal it follows that F(X, t) =0 also has a continuous normaP. 
We assume, in fact, that (182.2) are sufficiently smooth astopermit any number 
of differentiations and functional inversions. The theory we construct is local. 
Some aspects of the foregoing theory, whil,e not losing their validity, lose 
their intuitive appeal when applied to the material variables. The shape of 
Y (t), including its first and second differential forms, and its unit normal, have 
no immediate interpretation, for they do not correspond to any geometrical 
properties that an observer of a singular surface in space would perceive. 
The material representation, rather, is of the nature of a diagram for the 
moving surface. It is only one of many such diagrams, for by choice of the initial 
instant, or of the co-ordinates or parameters X corresponding to given initial 
positions, the particular functional form that results from ( 182.1 )1 will differ 4• 
As an example of the above remarks we consider the unit normals n and N to f = 0 
and F = 0, given by 
1 HUGONIOT [1885, 4, p. 1231]. 
2 French: stationnaire. 
(182.5) 
3 This is proved under weaker assumptions by LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 6, § 1]. 4 The effect of such changes is discussed somewhat by HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~~ 79 
to 84]. 
508 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 183. 
where, as usual, f•m=gmqf,q and p,ß=gßYF,y. The former has an immediate geometric 
significance as a unit vector normal to the surface d (t) in the space of places x. The latter, 
dual to the former, applies only to one of many possible diagrams for the moving surface 
in various possible spaces of particles X and has no immediate interpretation. 
Since F,a. = f,k x~ rx.• by the dual of (17.3) we have 1 
F,rx. p,a. = I xfXI 2 gßY. t ekrp eß6e f,k x~, Xfp. t emsq eycr,l,m xfs X?q· (182.6) 
a result which in a common frame assumes the form 
VF.a.F,a. =I zfZI ( 8(/, Y,Z) )2 + (8(X,f,Z))2 + (8(X, Y,"7))2 a (x, y, z) a (x, y, z) a (x, y, z) . 
For the unit normals themselves we have the relations 
( 182.7) 
F a.X'\ VFpF.ß n = · · = Na.xrx. · • (182.8) k Vt,mf'm ;k Vt,mf'm' 
where VF.pF,ß and X~k are thought of as expressed in terms of spatial gradients by means 
of ( 182.6) and ( 17 .3), respectively. 
It is a natural requirement that the moving surface d (t) shall have a continuous and nonvanishing gradient vector f,k· Such a requirement if put upon the gradient vector F,rx. of .'7' 
has no immediate appeal. From (182.7), we see that F,rx. if continuous can vanish at a point 
if and only if either the radical or the Jacobian on the right-hand side vanishes. For the 
radical to vanish in a neighborhood, it is necessary and sufficient that f be functionally 
independent of X, Y, Z: that is, by (182.1), that F=F(t), and such an equation cannot 
represent a surface. Thus F rx. vanishes only with the Jacobian I zfZI. By the Axiom of Continuity in Sect. 65, it follows that for a material diagram F(X, t) = 0 obtained from a surface 
f(z, t) = 0 in a continuous motion, Fa. does not vanish except possibly at isolated points 
or lines. ' 
183. Speeds of propagation. Waves. The dual of the speed of displacement, 
defined by (177.5), is the speed of propagation 2 UN: 
aF 
at UN== ---==· 
VF.a.F•" 
( 183 .1) 
This speed is a measure of the rate at which the moving surface 9'(t) traverses 
the material. In particular, a necessary and sufficient condition that F = 0 be 
a material surface in an interval of time is that UN = 0 throughout the interval. 
A surface that is singular with respect to some quantity and that has a nonzero speed of propagation is said to be a propagating singular surface or wave 3 • 
Now it is evident that the value of UN for a given surface f(x, t) =0 in a 
given motion, unless UN = 0, depends in general upon the choice of the instant 
regarded as the time t = 0 for the motion of each particle 4• Thus there are infinitely many different speeds of propagation. Often it is most convenient to 
take the instant t=O as the present instant. Then Xrx.=6~xk, 8f8Xa.=6~8f8xk, 
and the functional forms of F and /, at this one instant and qua functions of x 
or X, are the same, but of course the time rates calculated with x held constant 
do not generally coincide with those calculated when X is held constant. In 
particular, with this choice of X the speed of propagation UN wiii be written 
as U and called the local speed of Propagation 5 of the surface. This speed, which 
1 HADAMARD [1903, 11, '\[82, footnote], TRUESDELL [1951, 35]. 
2 This quantity, for a general surface, first appears in the work of CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, 
§ 1]; it is the second of the "deux vitesses de Propagation" introduced by HuGONIOT 
[1885, 4, p. 1231]. Cf. also HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 1] [1903, 11, '\[98]. 3 HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 1] [1903, 11, '\[91]. 4 HUGONIOT [1887, 2, Part2, § 7], HADAMARD [1903, 11, '\[99]. 6 HuGoNroT [1885, 3, p. 1120], "vitesse de propagation rapportee au fluide lui-meme". 
RANKINE [ 1870, 6, § 2] in dealing with a one-dimensional case called U "the linear velocity 
of advance of the wave". 
Sect. 184. Boundaries. 509 
is the normal speed of the surface with respect to the particles instantaneously situate 
upon it, is related to the speed of displacement as follows: 
at oF 
U 7ft= UnTt• {183.2) 
More generally, we have from {182.5), {183.1), (177.5). and (74.1) the alternative forms 
UN V F,a.F;a. = Un Vf,k /•k- ik /,k l 
= (un- Xn) Vf,k /•k 
=-I 
(183-3) 
(d. (74.6)). If we choose the present configuration as the initial one, {183.3)3 
becomes 
U=---i 
Vt,k f.k ' 
while {183.3) 2 reduces to the moreelegant form1 
U = Un-Xn, 
(183.4) 
{183.5) 
expressing the evident fact tha:t the normal speed at which the particles now 
comprising d (t) are leaving it is the excess of their normal speed over the normal 
speed of the surface. 
184. Boundaries. Recalling that a body P4 is a set of particles X having 
positive mass, we define its boundary 2 at time t as the set of places x whose 
every neighborhood contains two places distinct from x, one of which is 
occupied by a particle of P4 and one is not. In kinematical terms, the bounding 
surface is adjacent to P4 but not crossed by any particle of P-4. In general, it is 
a moving and deforming surface. 
While an axiom of continuity was laid down in Sect. 65, we now replace it 
by the weaker requirement that the motion (66.1) be a topological transformation, 
i.e., a transformation that puts open sets in a region of X-t-space into one-to-one 
correspondence with open sets in x-t-space. In particular, for each fixed t the 
transformation of X into x will then be topological. Hence the boundary of a 
set in X-space is mapped, at each t, into the boundary of the corresponding set 
in x-space. Therefore, the boundary surface of every body in a topological motion 
is a material surface 3• Conversely, any material surface permanently divides 
the material (if there is any) on one side from that on the other, and thus consists in boundary points of the bodies (if any) upon each side. 
From these results and LAGRANGE's criterion in Sect. 74, it follows that 
in a continuous motion, a necessary and sufficient condition that a surface f = 0 
be a portion of the boundary of the material ( if any) instantaneously lying upon 
either side o f it is 
i=o. ( 184.1) 
When the motion fails to be topological, these results hold no longer, and 
boundaries may be instantly created or destroyed. General transformations 
1 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 100] but given in effect by HUGONIOT [1885, 3, p. 1120] in a 
sentence which is confusingly mispunctuated. 2 Same properties of boundaries have been given in Sect. 69. 3 HADAMARD [ 1903, 11, ~ 48] uses the differentiability of the motion to prove this result. 
The result was asserted by LAGRANGE [1783, 1, §§ 10-11] (cf. Sect. 74), but his discussion 
of a bounding surface is insufficient. 
510 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 184. 
are not of interest in field theories. There are important cases, however, when 
motions fail tobe topological at one certain instaut only, or upon certain isolated 
surfaces, curves or points. 
An example of the former is fumished by the fracture or welding of a solid 
(Fig. 25) or by the formation or coalescence of drops in a fluid. In these cases, 
0 0 
0 0 
Fig. 25. Fracture and welding. Fig. 26. Tear. 
interior particles suddenly find themselves on the boundary of two disjoint 
motions, or boundary particles suddetlly become interior ones. A still more 
complicated singularity is a tear such as that shown in Fig. 26, where the singular 
line .'!/ is propagating into the material, splitting each particle X in its progress 
Anyconlinuous 
moltun 
a 
c Prisms rolling upon 
one onoll!er 
Anyconlinuous 
motion 
b 
d 
Fig. 27 a-d. Examples of non·topological motions. 
into two particles x+ and 
x-, one of which stays upon 
the boundary fJB+ and the 
other upon the boundary 
!!4-. Singularities located 
upon lines seem not to have 
been studied from a general 
viewpoint. 
The latter type of nontopological motion allows 
us to represent motions in 
which particles enter and 
depart from a boundary 
surface, possibly quite 
smoothly along tangential 
paths1 . Let Fig. 27 (a) represent, say, a rigid cylinder 
or a fluid vortex spinning 
just below the plane free 
surface of a fluid and tangent at the top, and let the 
region outside the cylinder be endowed with any topological motion such that 
the cylinder and the plane constitute its boundary 2• The combined motion 
fails to be topological at the line of tangency, and we may say that particles on 
the cylindrical stream surface continually rise into the plane boundary and fall 
away from it again. In this example, however, as in all others formed by 
piecing together topological motions upon portions of their boundaries, the 
1 PorssoN [1831, 2, § 12] [1833, 4, § 652]. 2 This example and that in Fig. 27 (d) were given by KELVIN [1848, 5]. 
Sect. 184. Boundaries. 511 
complete boundary, consisting of the union of the constituent boundaries, is 
again a material surfacel, though a material surface on which the motion fails 
to be topological. Other examples are shown in Fig. 27. 
In the case of motions that fail tobe continuous in the sense defined in Sect. 65, 
the condition ( 184.1) is neither necessary nor sutficient that I= 0 be a material 
surface or consist in boundary points of the material, if any, that it instantaneously separates. 
From (183.3) it is plain that UN =0, for all choices of the initial configuration, is equivalent to f=o provided F "F·"=I=O. Now F "F·" is not determined 
by the instantaneous shape of the mo~ing surface alone, but is influenced also 
by the motion. The two effects are in some measure separated in the identity 
{182.7). The quantity under the root sign on the right assumes the values 0 or oo 
if and only if the equation F(X, t) = 0 reduces to the form F(t) = 0, which does 
not represent a surface. Thus F,"F·", for a surface F =0, is singular only with 
Jz/ZJ; if the Axiom of Continuity in Sect. 65 holds, from {183.3) we thus read 
off a formal proof of LAG RANGE' criterion. More generally, by ( 156.2) we have 
VF.(XF·" oc ~, and hence UN eo oc (! f. (184.2) 
We consider particles suchthat eo=I=O, oo. Then from (184.2) 2 we conclude thatl: 
1. II (! = oo upon the surlace I =0 and UN=I= oo, then (184.1) is satisfiea, but 
the surface may or may not be material. 
2. II e =0 upon the surface I =0 over an interval of time, then the surface is 
material, whether or not (184.1) is satislied. The condition {184.1) remains sullicient, but not necessary, that I= 0 be a material surlace. 
3. Bothin Case 1 andin Case 2, the condition (184.1) is necessary, but not 
sullicient, that the surlace I =0 be an admissible boundary. 
The case when e = oo upon f = 0 is illustrated by the following example 1 : 
x=X-ct, y=(Y}-kt)3 , z=Z. (184.3} 
Since 
( 184.4) 
the velocity field is plane, single-valued, steady, and irrotational 2, and the stream lines are 
the similar cubical parabolas 
y = [: (x- X)+ y~r z = z. {184.s) 
which cross the y = 0 plane tangentially (Fig. 28). The density is given by 
_I!Q_ = o(x, y, z) = (1-)i e o(X, Y,Z) Y ' 
so that I!= oo upon the plane y = 0. For this plane we have the equations 
I = y = F = ( y!.- k t) 3 = o, 
and hence 
(184.6} 
(184.7} 
{184.8} 
Although (184.1) is satisfied, the plane y=O is neither a material surface nor a boundary, 
since the particles are continuously crossing it. Neither is y = 0, while indeed a persistent 
surface of discontinuity, a singular surface in the sense defined in Sect. 180, since no jump 
discontinuity occurs across it. 
1 TRUESDELL [1951, 35]. 
2 Hence this motion, despite its artificial appearance, is dynamically possible (in theory) 
for an ideal gas subject to no extrinsic force; the motion is tobe conceived as occurring in a 
channel bounded by cylinders erected upon two of the curves shown in Fig. 28. 
512 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 185. 
The speed of displacement, Un, is zero, since the plane y = 0 is stationary. The speed of 
propagation UNis given by 
(184.9) 
Thus the surface y = 0 is suffering propagation with respect to all the particles except those 
instantaneously situate upon it. The local speed of propagation is zero, U = 0, but for no 
other choice of the initial instant or of material 
!I variables can UN vanish. These observations are 
X 
Fig. 28. The plane y = 0 is not a material surface even though y = 0 upon it. 
also evident from Fig. 28. 
The nature of the discontinuity of the motion 
is made clearer if we calculate the distance d at 
time t between the two particles X, Y, Z and X, 
(Y!+n!) 3, Z, whereD>O. From (184.3) we have 
d = D + 3(YL kt) n! + 3 (Yl- kt) 2 n!. (184.10) 
Thus D is the distance between the two particles 
at the instant they cross the plane y = o. From 
(184.10) it follows that no matter how small is D, 
there exists a time t0 such that both after t = t0 
and before t = - t0 the distance d is arbitrarily !arge. Thus no material volume remains 
bounded. 
185. Slip surfaces, dislocations, vortex sheets, shock waves. The first kind of 
singular surface tobe used in continuum mechanics was the slip surface of HELMHOLTZ1. On such a surface, the inverse motion X =X(~. t) is discontinuous. 
Each place ~ is simultaneously occupied by two particles, X+ and x-. Two 
different masses thus slip past one another without penetration. The surface 
f (;r, t) = 0 is a material boundary of each motion. 
Fig. 29. Vortex sheet of order o. Fig. 30. Dislocation. 
A surface across which the velocity suffers a transversal discontinuity, 
[ :i:] =f= o, [in] = o , (185.1) 
is called a vortex sheet. 
Slip surfaces are vortex sheets; sometimes they are called vortex sheets of 
order 0. Such vortex sheets are easily constructed by placing adjacent to one 
another two motions having a common boundary. Unless it happens that 
[x] =0, that boundary will be a vortex sheet of the composite motion. Thus, 
alternatively, a slip surface may be regarded as a material surface on which 
the functions occurring in (66.1)1 are double-valued (Fig. 29). 
The dislocations of VaLTERRA 2 are singular surfaces intended to represent 
the deformation corresponding to removal or insertion of one mass within another, 
or the welding of boundaries (Fig. 30). There results a surface upon which X(~. t) 
is double-valued. Such surfaces need not be material; they may propagate, and 
they may bear any kind of discontinuity in the velocity. 
1 [1858, 1, § 4], "diskontinuierliche Flüssigkeitsbewegung". 2 [1905, 6], "distorsioni". Cf. the example given in Sect. 49. 
Sect. 185. Slip surfaces, dislocations, vortex sheets, shock waves. 513 
A shock surface1 is one across which the normal velocity is discontinuous: 
(185.2) 
Dislocations may be shock surfaces. 
Little of a generalnature may be said regarding such discontinuities, especially 
since they may represent removal or insertion of material. 
The considerations of Sect. 182 regarding the material diagram must now be 
modified, since to a single spatial surface f (:.c, t) = 0 there correspond two distinct 
diagrams F+=o, F-=o, viz., 
0 =f(:.c,t) =F+(X+(:.c,t),t) =F-(X-(:.c,t),t), (185.3) 
the functions X+(:.c, t) and x-(:.c, t) being the two inverse functions to the singlevalued equation :.c =:.c(X, t) defining the motion of the medium. Thus the principle of duality fails to hold for these singularities. 
Moreover, we cannot apply the conditions of compatibility given in Sects. 175 
and 180, since the function :.c (X, t) is not defined, in general, upon both sides 
of either one of the diagrams F+=o, F-=o in the space of particles. HADAMARD's 
lemmastill holds, however, and may be used to derive some meager information 2• 
For example, we can calculate the normal n in terms of the normals N+ 
and N-, using (17.3) and (182.8) with appropriate limiting values from one side 
only. Thus we may put the condition (185.1) 2 for a vortex sheet into the following 
form 3 : [xkl e ea.fly F± xm± xP± = 0. J kmp ,a. ,{J ,Y ( 185 .4) 
Each of the diagrams F+=o and F-=o has its own speed of propagation, u,: 
and U;J, given by (183.1) applied to F+ and to F-. Each of these speeds of propagation has the indeterrninacy described in Sect. 183. By using (185.3) we may 
repeat the analysis leading to (183-3) and so obtain 
ti+ J<+.a: · V"F-::-p-. a: • u,:Vfk ,k+x;=un=U;JVt~f.k +x~. (185.5) 
For this identity to hold, the derivatives X~a. and xk need not exist upon the 
singular surface; by HADAMARD's lemma, limit values from the + side of F+=o 
and the - side of F-=o, respectively, are employed throughout, it being assumed, as usual, that these limit values are continuously differentiable functions 
of position upon the surfaces. 
This relation connects the two different speeds of propagation, whatever be 
the choices of the initial configurations corresponding to the two diagrams 
F+=o and F-=u. We are at liberty to choose the present configuration as the 
initial one, both for the particles on the + side of F+ = 0 and for those on the -
side of F-=o. By (185.5), the corresponding local speeds of propagation, U+ 
and u-. satisfy the relations 4 
(185.6) 
1 RIEMANN [1860, 4, §§4-5], "Verdichtungsstoß"; cf. STOKES [1848, 4], "a surface 
of discontinuity ". 
2 E.g., the Counterpart of (175-5) is 
(xk a. Xa.LI)+ = (xka. Xa.LI)-, , J J J 
where the curves vr = const on F+ = 0 and F- = 0 are selected by identification of the points 
X+ and x- that occupy the same place x. lt does not seem possible to make any use of this 
relation. 
3 BJERKNES et al. [1933, 3, § 18]. . 4 CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, § 1], HADAMARD [1903, 11, '1\102]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. lll/1. 33 
514 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 185. 
The jump in the speed of propagation of a singular surface is the negative of the 
jump in the normal velocity of the material, and a necessary and sufficient condition for the speed of propagation to be continuous is that the normal speed of 
the material be continuous, i.e., that the singular surface not be a shock surface. 
From (185.6) we read off the following theorems concerning shock surfaces 
and vortex sheets, subject to the assumption that x (X, t) be single-valued 
and continuous, though X(x, t), in general, is double-valued: 
1. The local speed of Propagation cannot be continuous across a shock surface. 
2. There are no material shock surfaces, i.e., shock surfaces are always waves 1 • 
3· The local speed of Propagation of a vortex sheet is always continuous. In 
particular, a vortex sheet which is material with respect to the particles on one side 
is also material with respect to those on the other. 
In the case of singular surfaces where the motion itself, or the velocity, is 
singular, the dual of the kinematical condition of compatibility (180.3) must 
be modified. Retracing the steps leading to that condition, we first write the 
dual of (180.1) for paths on each of the two material diagrams that may represent 
the singular surface f (x, t) = 0, thus obtaining 
~+w+ ='f++U.+N""8 w+ !5_w- =w-+U.-Nß8 wM N "" ' !5t N ß ' (185.7) 
where (J+j(Jt and (J_.((Jt as defined with respect to the normal velocities of the two 
diagrams in the space of particles X. Even when the two diagrams coincide, 
the speeds of propagation appropriate to the two sides are in general different, 
as already noted. We now choose the present configuration as the initial configuration, both for the + and for the- sides, and subtract the second of (185.7) 
from the first. Thus follows 2 
['f] = [~~]- [Unk8kW], 
= [~~]- u+[nkokw] -[U]nkokw-, 
= [~~]- U+[nk 8kW] + [.iJ nk okw-, 
( 185 .8) 
where we have used (185.6). In these formulae it must be remernbered that on 
the two sides of the surface 'f is calculated on the basis of ~+ and ~-. while the 
normal velocities used in calculating (Jj(Jt are U+ n and u- n, respectively. 
1 A shock surface may be material with respect to the particles on one side but not with 
respect to those on both sides. 
2 A result of this kind is asserted by KoTCHINE [1926, 3, § 1], but his statement has 
!5[W]f!5t rather than [!5W/!5t] and thus is incorrect unless the operator !5/!51, referred to the 
material diagram, is continuous, i.e., unless the singular surface is a vortex sheet. 
Fora check on (185.8), put W =ik. The dual of (179.3) yields 
~-X 
!5+xk - 'k+ + u+ '"" k+ N1V X,rx • 
When the present configuration on the + side is taken as the initial state, this formula 
reduces to 
o xk _+_=ik++ M u+nk· , 
hence 
[ ~ 
!5xk] = [.~k] + [U]nk. 
Therefore (185.8) is satisfied. 
Sect. 186. Material vortex sheets. 515 
Whenx is continuous, (185.8) reduces to the dual of (180.2). Another special 
case will be discussed in the next section. 
186. Material vortex sheets. In the case of a material singularity, irrespective 
of whether or not m(X, t) is continuous, we have U+= U-=o, andin virtue of 
the duals of {179.1) we may reduce (185.8) to the form 
(186.1) 
where d+fdt and d_jdt are the material derivatives calculated with x+ and xheld constant, respectively. Hence1 
['i!l = d+J:l +[x"]\V~", 
= d_[w]_ +[xk]\V+ dt ,k, 
= __!_ (~+_ + d-_) [\V]+~ [x"J (\V\+ \V-"). 2 'dt dt 2 • • 
(186.2) 
It was suggested by HELMHOLTZ2 that the velocity ol the vortex sheet be defined 
as the mean of the velocities on each side: 
(186.3) 
Only when the sheet is steady is this velocity tangent to it. Writing dfdt for 
the material derivative following this velocity u, we have 
(186.4) 
and (186.2) becomes 
(186.5) 
where we write 
grad \V == i (grad \V)++ i {grad \V)-, ( 186.6) 
etc. Eqs. {186.1) and {186.5) arealternative forms of the kinematical condition of 
compatibility lor material singular surlaces. 
In particular, if \V and grad \V are continuous, from (186.5) we have 
[ 'i!] = [x] . grad \V. (186.7) 
Since the singular surface has been assumed material, we have d+lfdt =d-lfdt =0, 
and hence [j] =0. Putting \V =I in (186.7) yields 
[x] · grad I= o. (186.8) 
Hence it follows that il the velocity is not continuous across a singular surface 
that is persistently material with respect to the motion on each side, that surface is 
necessarily a vortex sheet 3• Thus we have another proof that shock surfaces are 
always waves. 
1 The first of these forms is given by KOTCHINE [1926, 3, § 4]. 
2 [1858, 1, § 4]. 3 HADAMARD [1903,11, ~94]. 
33* 
516 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 186. 
For any material derivative, we have identically T;. = i k-x"' k Im. 
d+lfdt = 0, this equation yields d+f.ddt = -x"'+,k l,m, ~nd hence ' · 
Since 
d-f,k _ 1 ( 'm+ 'm- ) I ~dt- - -2 x ,k +x ,k ·"'' (186.9) 
or 
dgrad/ -~. ~(jj- = - grad;v · grad I. (186.10) 
Therefore, 
dn -d. . -d. ) -d1-=-gra X·n+n(n·gra ;v.n. (186.11) 
This result shows that the manner in which the unit normal to the material 
singular surface changes as viewed by an observer moving with the mean velocity 
u is definitely determined. 
The same is true of the jump in the acceleration, for if we put \!! =;r, in (186.5), 
we obtain 
(186.12) 
a result which bears a formal similarity to (98.1) 2 for the acceleration of a continuous motion. ( 186.12) is an iterated kinematical condition of compatibility 
for the special case of a material singular surface. It is a simple corollary that 
[or] =0 implies [.Z.] =0; that is, il the velocity is continuous across a material 
singular surlace, so is the acceleration1• 
We now interpret (186.12) more closely by resolving it in directions normal 
and tangential to the surface. From (186.12) 1 and (186.9) we have 
I ,k [xk] =I ,k ä[ dt xk] + _1_ 2 [x"'] (xk+ ,m + xk-) ,m I ,k' l - k - (186.13) =I d[i 1 _ [ 'k] df,k • k dt X dt ' 
By (186.8), we may write this result in the alternative forms 2 
I ,k [xk] = -2 [ik] ät.k dt = + 21 . k aukl dt ' l 
[x] = 2n. ä[x]_ 
" dt ' 
(186.14) 
whence it follows that the normal acceleration is continuous if and only if the 
time rate of change of the velocity as apparent to an observer moving with the 
mean velocity is tangent to the surface. 
The more difficult reduction of the tangential component of ( 186.12) has been 
achieved by MüREAU 3• By (186.12) 2 and (186.11} we have 
1 HADAMARD [1903, 11, '\[ 9+] has noted an interesting variant: By differentiating twice 
the equation i = 0, we conclude that [x nl = 0 if [x] = 0. That is, if at some particular instant 
the velocity is continuous across a material singular surface, then at that instant the acceleration may suffer a transversal jump but not a longitudinal one. The italicized result in the 
text above (due also to HADAMARD) refers to persistent continuity of ;i;. 
2 KorcHINE [ 1926, 3, § 4]. 
3 [1949, 19] [1952, 13, §Sc]. 
Sect. 187. General classification of singular surfaces. 
-fe (n X (;r]) = (x] X (grad X· n) - n X ([x] · grad x) + 
+ (nx[x]) (n·gradi:·n) +nx[x], 
= (nx[x]). gradx + [x] (n. w)-
- (n x [i:]) (div x - n · grad ;i: · n) + n x [x], 
517 
(186.15) 
where we have used vector identities and ( 186.8), and where w == curl x = ! (w+ + w-), the mean of the vorticities on the two sides. Now by (App. 21.4)1 we 
have 
( 186.16) 
Thus the quantity on the left-hand side is the divergence, calculated intrinsically 
upon the surface, of the projection of the mean velocity onto the surface. If, 
therefore, we imagine on the surface itself a fictitious motion with the velocity 
field n x u, an element of area da that is carried by this motion will change 
according to the formula 
1ft dda (-d. . -d. ) d = 1v x - n · gra x · n a (186.17) 
[ cf. (76.6), which holds in any metric space]. Putting ( 186.17) into ( 186.15) yields 
~ (nx[i:] da)= nx[x] da+ (nx[x] da). gradx+[x] (n. w) da } 
[ =n '']d [ '] -. ( [. ) (186.18) x a+nx x da·gradx-(n·w) nx nx x] da. 
This is MoREAu's result. Its significance is easier to assess when we use EMDE's 
notation (footnote 3, on p. 492): W= Curl x, W* = Curlx, for then we have 
d(':tdt1_ = W* da+ W da. grad i: - (n · w) n X W da. (186.19) 
Except for the last term, this equation has the same form as BELTRAMr's vorticity Eq. {101.7) 3 , establishing an analogy with between the convection and 
diffusion of the vorticity w dv of a material element of volume in a continuous 
motion and the transport of surface vorticity W da in an element of area 
which is material with respect to the mean motion on the vortex sheet. In 
many cases of vortex sheets in fluid mechanics, the spatial vorticity w vanishes 
or is tangent to the sheet on each side; in such cases, n · w = 0, and the analogy 
becomes precise. The analogue of the circulation preserving case is W* = 0. For 
this case, as MOREAU remarks, superficial analogues of all the classical theorems 
such as the Helmholtz theorems on spatially circulation preserving motions exist. 
187. General classification of singular surfaces. In Sect. 173 a singular 
surface was defined with respect to an arbitrary quantity \II. DuHEM1 proposed 
to regard all quantities associated with a motion as functions \II (X, t) of the 
material variables X, t and to define the order of a singular surface with respect 
to \II as the order of the derivative ( ~J aa, aa, ... aCI.p \j! of lowest order p + q 
suffering a non-zero jump upon the surface. Here, as in all that follows, we 
assume that in regions fll+ and f]l- on each side of the singular surface !/'(t) in 
1 [1900, 3]. 
518 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 187 
the space of material variables X, the function \1! (X, t) and all its derivatives up 
to the highest order considered exist and are continuously differentia ble functions 
of X and t, while on f/(t) they approach definite limits which are continuously 
differentiable functions of position. Thus we may apply the geometrical and 
kinematical conditions of compatibility ( 175.11) and ( 180.2) and use differential 
manipulations freely. 
There is no compelling reason to allow only discontinuities of this special 
type. J ump discontinuities upon surfaces are not the only ones that occur in 
physical problems; e.g. in Sect. 184 we have examined a simple and otherwise 
smooth motion in which the Jacobian I :x:fXI increases steadily to oo as a certain 
surface is crossed and decreases steadily thereafter. Boundaries, studied in 
Sect. 184, and slip surfaces, dislocations, and tears, studied or mentioned in 
Sects. 185 to 186, are excluded as not being defined by sufficiently smooth jump 
discontinuities in functions of the material variables. Singularities at isolated 
lines or points are common; some of these are described in works on potential 
theory. In the case of jump discontinuities on surfaces, there is no a priori 
ground to expect that the limit values on each side of the surface be continuously 
differentiable on the surface, as we have assumed. The reasons for considering 
here only singularities of this kind are, first, that for more general singularities 
other than those analyzed above, scarcely any definite results are known except in 
very particular cases, and, second, that singular surfaces of the above types are 
frequently found useful in special theories of materials. 
Clearly the definition of the order of a singular surface may be expressed 
1 . 1 . f h . d . . (q) N d'f' . a ternahve y rn terms o t e covanant envahves W;a.,a., ... a.p· o mo 11cahon 
in the results of Sects. 175 to 176 and 180 to 181 is needed to allow us to substitute double tensors of the type TL:~ ~:J in the various jump conditions. 
Many of the singularities of greatest interest are included in the case when 
\1! = :x: (X, t), (187.1) 
i.e., are surfaces across which the motion itself, or one of its derivatives, is discontinuous. By the order 1 of a singular surface henceforth we shall mean, unless 
some other quantity is mentioned explicitly, that we are taking \1! =:1:. Thus 
surfaces across which at least one of the functional relations (66.1) defining the 
motion itself is discontinuous are singularities of zero order; those across which 
some of the derivatives ik and x~a. are discontinuous are of first order, etc. 
In the classification of LICHTENSTEIN 2, the definition of the order is based 
upon the derivatives of the velocity field, ..C. Since i~m=X~a.X~m· a singular surface 
of order p in LICHTENSTEIN's scheme is also one of order p in that of DuHEM 
and HADAMARD, but the converse does not hold, for it is possible that a gradient 
such as x~a. may be discontinuous without there being any discontinuity in ik, 
etc. Thus the DUHEM-HADAMARD scheme includes a greater variety of singularities. 
Most researches on singular surfaces in fluids follow LICHTENSTEIN's classification, since in hydrodynamics it is possible largely to avoid consideration of the 
material variables. In retaining the DuHEM-HADAMARD classification we recognize 
its more fundamental scope 3 and its necessity in contexts such as the theory of 
1 HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 1] [1903, 11, ~ 75]. 2 LICHTENSTEIN [ 1929, 4, Chap. 6, ~ 2]. 3 E.g., LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 6, ~ 2] concludes that there are no material singularities of first or second order. While this is true according to his definitions, it is true only 
because those definitions offer no possibility of considering discontinuities in xka. and x\.ß, 
unaccompanied by discontinuities in time derivatives of x. This example illust~ates th~ insufficiency of LrcHTENSTEIN's scheme. 
Sects. 188, 189. Singular surfaces of order 1: Shock waves and propagating vortex sheets. 519 
elasticity, but we take care to derive from it, among other consequences, the 
spatial formulae that have found use in hydrodynamics. 
In the following sections we find the kinematical properties of singular 
surfaces of finite order1. 
At a singular surface of order 0, the motion x = x (X, t) suffers a jump discontinuity. This must be interpreted as stating that the particles X upon the 
singular surface at time t are simultaneously occupying two places x+ and xor jump instantaneously from z- to x+. Such discontinuities have not been 
found useful in field theories up to the present time. Therefore, in what follows, 
we study singular surfaces of orders 1 and greater. 
188. Material singular surfaces. Material vortex sheets have been studied in 
Sect. 186. The results derived there remain valid for material singular surfaces 
of all orders. Fora singularity of order 1 or greater, X (z, t) is continuous, d+fdt = 
d_fdt, and (186.1) reduces to 
[Ii!] =['V]. (188.1) 
This is the generat kinematical canditian af campatibility far material singularities 
af arder greater than 0. 
Its major use is to show that ['V] = 0 implies [ W] = 0: Continuity of 'V implies 
continuity of '!'. In other words, the derivative af lawest arder that is discantinuaus 
acrass a material singularity is always a purely spatial derivative, never a time 
derivative 2• This is the dual of the theorem stated just after (180.4). 
In particular, across a material singularity of first order, since x (X, t) is 
continuous, so is ~. That is, not only shock surfaces but also vartex sheets af first 
arder are waves, while for the material vortex sheets described in Sect. 186 it is 
impossible that the motion itself be continuous across them. Vortex sheets are 
thus divided into two distinct categories: those of order 0, which are material, 
and those of order 1, which propagate. Across a material singularity of first 
order, ~ is continuous, but at least one of the deformation gradients x~" suffers 
a discontinuity. 
189. Singular surfaces of order 1: Shock waves and propagating vortex sheets. 
Forasingular surface of order 1, we put 'V = x!' in the duals of (180.5) and obtain 3 
[~ .. ] = sk N .. , sk =[Nß ~p]. [X"]=- UN sk. (189.1) 
1 A singular surface of infinite order is defined by HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 76] as one such 
that on each side, the function occurring in (66.1) aredifferent analytic functions, yet all 
their derivatives are continuous across the surface. Such singularities seem not to have been 
studied. They offer interesting possibilities. For example, a one-dimensional motion starting 
very smoothly from rest at t = 0 is furnished by x =X for t ~ 0, x =X+ f (X) e-c/1' for t > 0, 
where c > o. 
In works on physics we often encounter discontinuous solutions regarded as limits of 
continuousones; cf., e.g., the definition of adiscontinuity given by MAXWELL [1873. 5, §§ 7-8], 
[1881, 4, § 8]. Perhaps seeking to justify such a treatment, LicHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 6, 
§§ 6-7] proves that any motion with a singular surface of order 1 or 2 may be obtained as a 
limit of analytic motions. Such theorems, however, do not reflect the physical situation. In 
electromagnetic theory, for example, physicists are wont to regard the solution of a problern 
for a material whose dielectric constant changes abruptly from K 1 to K 1 upon a certain surface 
as the limit of the solutions of "the same" problern for a dielectric suchthat K varies smoothly 
from K 1 to K1 in a thin layer containing the surface. In gas dynamics, a flow of an ideal gas with 
a shock wave is regarded as the limit of solutions of a corresponding boundary value problern 
for viscous, thermally conducting fluids as the viscosity and thermal conductivity tend to 
zero. Problemsofthis kind presuppose some definite theory of materials and have no meaning 
in the generality of the present treatise. Even in relatively simple definite cases, they offer 
the highest mathematical difficulty. Cf. Sect. 5. 2 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~~93, 104). 3 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 101]. 
520 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 189. 
The vector s is the singularity vector; while (189.1) 2 shows it to be parallel to 
the jump of velocity, its magnitude varies with the choice of the initial state and 
thus does not furnish a measure of the strength of the singularity. Rather, 
guided by the result given in Sect. 188, it is convenient to divide singular surfaces 
of order 1 into two classes: 
1. Material singularities, which affect only the deformation gradients ~"'. 
2. Waves, including both shock waves and propagating vortex sheets. 
For the former, the choice of the initial state is of prime importance. For the 
latter, it is not, and the nature of the waves is best specified in terms of the jump 
ofvelocity itself, [:V], which may be arbitrary bothin direction andin magnitude. 
Indeed, if we adopt a strictly spatial standpoint, we may say the only geometrical 
and kinematical requirement is that discontinuities in velocity be propagated, both 
the amount of the discontinuity and the speed of propagation being arbitrary. 
Even here the adherents of a strictly spatial standpoint are closing their eyes 
to one of the phenomena occurring, since from (189.1) it follows that a fump ,·n 
velocity is impossible unless it is accompanied by fumps in the deformation gradients ~«· 
The results derived in Sect. 185, since they presume less regularity than is 
here assumed, remain valid for singularities of order 1. In particular, the speed 
of propagation satisfies (185.6), and the first and second theorems derived from 
it remain relevant. The third theorem is irrelevant, since, as just shown, vortex 
sheets of first order are always waves. 
Since the functions occurring in (66.1) are continuous and single-valued by 
hypothesis, there is only one material diagram corresponding to a given initial 
state, and the principle of duality now holds. However, it is necessary to proceed 
with caution, since the fact that xk« experiences a jump on " implies that if we 
regard a succession of initial states X corresponding to different initial times t0 , 
these states jump discontinuously at t0 = t ± 0. In particular, choosing the states 
on the + and - sides of the singular surfaces leads to different local speeds 
of propagation, u+ and u-, satisfying (185.6), as already stated. Writing the 
corresponding vectors s as s+ and s-, we have 
hence 
By (185.6) follows 
[Us]=O. 
un[s] =[ins]. 
In the case of a vortex sheet, this relation reduces to 
in the case of a stationary shock wave, to 
[ins] = 0. 
(189.2) 
(189.3) 
(189.4) 
(189.5) 
(189.6) 
The nature of first order shock waves is illustrated by the very simple example1 furnished 
by the one-dimensional motion defined by the equations y = Y, z = Z, and 
X= l 
X+ 2vt when X ~0, 
l X + v t when X :::;; 0, 
X + v t when X ~ 0, 
2X + 2vt when X ~0, 
1 LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 4, Chap. 6, § 8]. 
- oo<vt~-tx, 1 
-tx;;;;.vt<oo, 
x;;;;.vt<oo, 
- oo<vt;;;;.-X, 
(189.7) 
Sect. 189. Singular surfaces of order 1: Shock waves and propagating vortex sheets. 521 
v =!= 0. This motion is defined over all space, and the equation x = x (X, t) is continuous for 
every value of X and t. The stationary surface x = 0 is a shock wave. The particles constituting the material plane X= const occupy a spatial plane at all times. They travel with the 
uniform speed i = 2 v until they encounter the shock wave; their speed then drops to i = v. 
\Vith respect to the particles X it has not yet reached, a material diagram of the shock wave 
is given by 
F~X+2vf=O; (189.8) 
with respect to those it has passed, by 
F~X+vt=O. (189.9) 
The speed of propagation is u-=- 2v in the former case, u+= -V in the latter. In both 
cases, N = (1, 0, 0); for the former case, s = s-= (t, 0, 0), while for the latter, s = s+= ( 1, 0, 0). 
This example is specially simple in that conditions are homogeneaus on each side of the 
shock wave, so that only two different possibilities for s arise naturally; as always, there 
are in fact infinitely many 1. 
The two planes X= X 0 and X= X 0+ D, where D > 0, remain a distance D apart until 
the latter encounters the shock. After the shock has passed, their distance apart is t D. 
The shock thus effects not only a sudden drop in velocity but also a sudden condensation. 
We now prove that this is representative of the general case. 
To determine the jump experienced by a volume element through which a 
wave of first order passes, we calculate the jump in the Jacobian V?J/VG = xjX. 
By {189.1h we have 
By the dual of (17.3) follows 
_E_ -1 + PN XY- 1- - s y ,p· (189.11) 
Now we may apply (182.8) and (189.1) 3 , writing Uii to recall that the derivatives 
X~"k are used in the calculation2 ; using also (185.5) 2 we thus obtain 
(189.12) 
or, by (185.6), 
Xri-un u+ 
Xn -Un = U~' {189.13) 
Thus the passage of a shock wave of first order 3 causes an abrupt change of volume, 
the ratio being that of the local speeds of Propagation. 
1 We are not obliged to use initial positions or reetangular co-ordinates as material 
co-ordinates. 
2 The calculation may be shortened by taking the state on the - side of the surface as the 
initial state from the beginning. 
3 The qualification, "of first order", refers to the possibility of shocks in which :r(X, t) 
is discontinuous. About such shocks, mentioned in Sect. 185, little definite can be 
said. 
522 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 189. 
This result is usually presented in terms of the density e; from ( 156.2) then 
follows the Stokes-Christoffel condition: 
(189.14) 
These forms are of frequent use1 . 
From (189.14) we see that shock waves offirst order areimpossible in an isochoric motion, and that the passage of a vortex sheet offirst order leaves the volume 
unchanged. 
By combining (185.6)a and (189.14)1 we obtain the identity 
e±U±[xn]=-[eU2]=(U-) 2 ~= [e]. (189.15) 
Since, by hypothesis, J > 0, from ( 189.13) it follows that in- un is of the 
same sign on each side of the singularity. That is, if to an observer situate upon 
the surface the material seems to approach on one side, it departs upon the 
opposite side. The side on which the material approaches is called the front 
side, and the sign- will be assigned to it; the other side is the rear. The strength ö 
of a shock wave of first order is defined as 
.ll = _hl = _[:_- 1 = [in] u- (F (F u+ . (189.16) 
If ö > 0, the shock effects condensation; in the contrary case, rarefaction 2 • 
By putting \V= xk in the duals of (176.8) and (181.8) we may calculate the forms of the 
jumps of x:rxß• i:rx• and xk across a shock wave. The results are complicated. Weshall give 
them only for the quantity of greatest interest, the acceleration fi. Putting 
(189.17) 
from (181.8) and (189.1) 2•3 we obtain 
2 t5ct sk t5ct UN ) [xk] = UN ck - 2 UN --- sk --- M M ' 
_ U? k <5d[ik] _ [ 'k] <5ctlog UN - N c + 2 t5t X 0t ' 
(189.18) 
where the displacementderivative t5ct/M is defined in terms of the motion of the samematerial 
diagram F(X, t) = 0 as is used to calculate the speed of propagation, UN· Since the quantity 
ck, the jump of the fully normal second spatial derivatives, is essentially arbitrary, there 
is no immediate interpretation for the result ( 189.18). 
Indeed, since the jump in velocity is arbitrary, so are the jumps in its derivatives, and 
there is no restriction in general upon [ik,m] or [xk]. It may be convenient, nevertheless, 
to resolve these jumps by means of the identities (175.11) and (180.3). The results are 3 
[ik,m] = [nPik,p] nm+ gmpa.dr xf.d [ik];r,l 
[ 8 i k] - [ p • ] + t5ct [ i k] 8t -- Un n xk,P _t5_t_' 
(189.19) 
1 The direct proof given in the text simplifies and generalizes that of KoTCHINE [1926, 
3, § 3. ~ 1]; the customary proof, resting upon an integral form of the principle of conservation 
of mass, will be given in Sect. 193. For one-dimensional motion, the result is due to STOKES 
[1848, 4, Eq. (2)], RIEMANN [1860, 4, § 5], and RANKINE [1870, 6, §§ 2-4], the general case, 
to CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, § 1] and JouGUET [1901, 9]. The classical treatment isthat of 
HADAMARD [1903, Jl, ~~ 109-110). 2 There is no kinematical or dynamical reason why rarefaction shocks cannot occur, although special thermodynamic conditions, including those usually assumed in gas dynamics, 
may forbid them. 3 The somewhat different results obtained by HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~~112, 113 bis, 
119-120] are equally inconclusive. 
Sect. 190. Singular surfaces of order 2: Aceeieration waves. 523 
where the displacement derivative 15d/15t now refers to the spatial equation of the singularity, 
f(:JJ, t) = o. 
190. Singular surfaces of order 2: Aceeieration waves. For singular surfaces 
of order 2, the analysis is simpler, since the speed of propagation UNis continuous. 
Substituting 1,1! = xk into the dual of ( 176.1 0) yields 
[~cxlll = [8px~"'] = [8"'x~11] = sk N"'N11 , } 
sk =[NY N~ o~x~y] =[NY N~ x~y.,]. (19°·1) 
From the dual of (181.9) we have similarly1 
(190.2) 
These formulae show that a singular surface of order 2 is completely determined 
by a vector s and the speed of propagation, UN. In particular, material discontinuities of second order affect only the derivatives ~"' 11 , while discontinuities 
in the acceleration and in the velocity gradient are necessarily propagated, and 
conversely, every wave of second order carries jumps in the velocity gradient 
and the acceleration. Waves of second order are therefore called acceleration 
waves. 
Since X~m is continuous, by (190.2h and (182.8) we have 
[i~m] =- UNskNcxX"',m• l =- UN sk VVt.t>_t__t:,_ nm. 
F,pF.II 
(190.3) 
The left-hand side is independent of the choice of the initial state; therefore so 
also is the coefficient of n upon the right-hand side. Thus if we put 
Us0k= UNsk Vt,pt:P , (190.4) 
VF.pF.II 
the vector Us0 is independent of the choice of the initial state. We may choose 
to regard U as the local speed of propagation and s 0 as the value of s corresponding to a choice of the material co-ordinates as being equal to the spatial Coordinates at the instant the wave passes. In this notation, (190-3) and (190.2) 3 
become 2 
[~m] =- U s~ nm, [xk] = s~. 
From (190.5) we have a number of corollaries. First, 
- U [nm i~m] = [xk], 
[()ik]- ["k]- [ ·~ ] •m ot - X X ,m X ' 
= s~ + U S~Xn, 
= Uunst 
(190.5) 
(190.6) 
where we have used (183.5). Thus the local acceleration is continuous across 
an acceleration wave if and only if the wave is stationary. Second, 
[Ic~J = [divi:] =- Us0 • n, } (190.7) [w] = [curli:] =- Us0 X n; 
l Eqs. (190.1) to (190.2) are due essentially to HUGONIOT [1885. 4, p. 1231] [1887, 2, 
Part II, § 9)]. Cf. HADAMARD [1901, 8, § 2] [1'903, 11, ~ 102]. 
2 These results and (190.6) were given by HUGONIOT [1885, 3, p.1120] [1887, 2, Part I, 
§ 9] in forms with U s~ eliminated. 
524 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classica] Field Theories. Sect. 191. 
interpretation of these identities yields Hadamard's theorem1 : A longitudinal 
acceleration wave carries a fump in the expansion but leaves the vorticity unchanged, 
while a transverse acceleration wave carries a fump zn the vorticity but does not 
affect the expansion. 
By (156.5) 2 , we may put (190.7) 2 into the alternative form 
[lo~ e] = U s 0 · n = -& [xn]. (190.8) 
Since log e is continuous across an acceleration wave, by putting lj! =log e in 
the dual of (180.5h we have 
[lo~el =- u [a 1
;!e]. (190.9) 
By ( 190.8) follows the important relation 
[Xn] =- U2 [d~!e]. (190.10) 
191. Singular surfaces of higher order 2• For a singular surface of order p, 
the results are easy generalizations of those for the case when p = 2. 
Putting lj! = xk into the dual of ( 176.11) yields 
[xk•"''"'•···"'P] = [8"', 8"', ... 811Pxk] = sk Na, Na, ... N"'P' } 
sk = [Nß, Nß• ... Nßp 8p, 8p, ... 8ppxk], (191.1) 
while the dual of (181.11) yields 
[xk ] = - U. sk N N N ,cx1a:2···!Xp-1 N a1 a2 • •• cxp-I' 
( 191.2) 
[(P_;Ilk] = (- U. )P-I sk N ,o:l N CXt' 
[~lk] = (- UN)P sk = (- U)P s~. 
Thus a singularity of order p carries a jump in the p-th acceleration if and only 
if it is a wave. 
Now by (156.5) we have 
-·- 'k "' 'k - log !? =X , a. X, k =X, k, (191.3) 
so that 
_(h_)_ (h) 
-(log e),a.,a., ... a.p-1-" = x k,a.a., a., ... a.p-1-" x~k+ ... , (191.4) 
where the dots stand for a polynomial in derivatives of orders less than p. By 
( 191.2) we thus obtain 
_l!L_ 
-[(loge),a.,a, ... ap- _,.]=~- UN)hNa.,Na.,···Na.p-1_,.Na.xa..•sk,} (
191.5) 
h - 0, 1' ... 'p - 1 . 
Choosing the initial state as that on the singular surface yields 
_l!L_ 
-[(log e),k,k, ... kp-I-A] = (- U)hson nk, nk, ... nkp-1-h' ( 191.6) ------
1 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~~111-115]; announced in part in [1901, 8, § 3]. In part, these 
results are equivalent to WEINGARTEN's formulae (175.10) and are foreshadowed by a theorem 
of HuGONIOT [1887, 2, Part I, § 12]. 
2 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~~88, 103,111-111 bis]. 
Sect. 192. The transport theorem for a region containing a singular surface. 525 
In particular, from this result and (191.2) 4 we have 
__lE::!L 1 ( p) 
[(logg)] = u [xn]. (191.7) 
This relation enables us to attach a meaning to the sign of a discontinuity. [Cf. 
(189.16) and (190.8).] If the propagating singular surface of p-th order carries 
(p-1) 
with it an increase in log g, it may be said tobe a compressive wave; in the contrary case expansive. From (191.7) we see that a wave is compressive or expansive 
d. . b . . d . h 1 (p) accor mg as It nngs an mcrease or ecrease m t e norma component Xn of 
the p-th acceleration 1• In particular, in an isochoric motion, acceleration waves 
of all orders are necessarily transversal, and, conversely, material singularities 
and transverse 'li/aves of all orders leave the density and all its derivatives continuous. 
In the case of a surface which is singular with respect to 'iJ and also a singular 
surface of order 2 or greater with respect to the motion itself, the principle of 
duality when applied to ( 180.3) yields 
['f] =- UN[N" 'il,<x] + ~~ [W], {191.8) 
where the displacement derivative (jdjbt is defined in terms of the motion of the 
material diagram F(X, t) = 0. This result follows at once because, corresponding 
to any selected initial state, there is a unique speed of propagation UN. [The 
modification necessary for a singularity of first order has been given as (185.8).] 
We now give an alternative derivation 2 of ( 191.8), based upon the spatial equations. From (176.2)1 we have 
X W,k: ~n~gk;a.xx;Ll ;r• 'k [ ] B · Ar 'k m A } 
-Bxn UA;r• ( 191.9) 
where ur is the dual of Ur, given by (177.11). From (181.2) we have 
[%}] =- Un B + /5~: , (191.10) 
where bctfbt is the displacement derivative defined with respect to the spatial 
surface f(x, t) =0. By adding tagether (191.9) and (191.10) and then using 
(183.5) and the dual of (179.5), we obtain the result (191.8) in the case when the 
present configuration is chosen as the initial one. 
V. Discontinuous equations of balance. 
192. The transport theorem for a region containing a singular surface. Consider 
a material volume "Y within which there occurs a surface j (t) that is a persistent 
singular surface with respect to a quantity W and possibly also with respect to i:. 
The singular surface, assumed smooth, may be in motion with any speed of 
displacement, Un. Our purpose is to generalize the transport theorem (81.3) 
so as to be applicable to such a volume. 
1 This analysis is due toHADAMARD [1903, 11, '1)117], whogivesalso [ibid., '1)116] a more 
general definition, applicable whether or not the kinematical conditions of compatibility 
hold; this definition Ieads to the sign of [(t~] as the criterion. HADAMARD's use of "comprimant" and "dilatant" is the inverse of ours. 
2 Suggested by KOTCHINE [ 1926, 3, § 1]. 
526 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classicai Field Theories. Sect. 193. 
While we consider a finite volume "/', we are interested only in the case when 
it is arbitrarily small and arbitrarily smooth. Thus it is sufficiently general to 
assume that d divides "'' into two regions (Ji+ and (!i- in which W and ~ are continuously differentiable (Fig. 31) and divides the material boundary !/ into 
two parts g+ and !7-. In general, the regions and surfaces (Ji+, (!i-, !f+, gfail to be material. We now define fields u+ and u- as follows 
u+= ~ Unn 
on 
on 
!f+, 
d, 
I ~ on !7-, 
u- = unn on d. 
(192.1) 
Since d is a persistent common boundary of (Ji+ and (ji-, 
we have 
Fig. 31. Diagram for proof of the 
transport theorem for a region 
divided by a singular surface. -d f d W V=---- W V+-- W dv du+ f d du- f dt dt dt ' 
'"f" fit+ fit-
(192.2) 
where du+fdt indicates that we are to take the time derivative of the integral 
over a region that instantaneously coincides with (Ji+ and is material with respect 
to the field u+, while du_fdt is analogously defined. To each of the integrals on 
the right, since W and ~ are continuously differentiable in (Ji+ and (ji- and approach 
continuous limits on the entire boundaries !f+ + d and g-+ d, we may apply 
the usual transport theorem (81.4), obtaining 
d;{- Jwdv= J ~ dv+ Jwxnda- jw+unda, I 
fit+ fit+ 9'+ 4 
d;; f w dv = f 0~- dv + f w Xnda +I w-unda. 
fit- fit- 9'- 4 
(192.3) 
By substituting these results into (192.2) we obtain1 
d~ I W dv =I ~ dv + ~ W Xnda- J [W] Unda. (192.4) 
'"f" '"f" 9' 
This is the desired generalization of (81. 3). 
193. The general balance at a surface of discontinuity. Let it be supposed 
that a general equation of balance of the form (157.1) holds for an arbitrary 
material volume, whether or not there is a singular surface within it. Then by 
applying (192.4) to a sufficiently small material volume "''containing a singular 
surface d we obtain 
f o(;t~) dv+~eWxnda- f[eW]unda=-~inda+ f esdv. (193.1) 
'"f" 9' 9' '"f" 
We now assume that in the neighborhood of d, the quantities o(~t~) and es 
are bounded, while on each side of d the quantities e W, Xn, and in approach 
1imits that are continuous functions of position. Under these conditions, we let 
1 THOMAS [1949, 31, § 18]. 
Sect. 194. Impulsive balance. 527 
!J"+ and y- shrink down to 6 (Fig. 32), so that the volume of ßl+ +Bl- vanishes 
while the area of 6 remains finite in the limit. The volume integrals then vanish 
in the limit, and (193.1) becomes 
f ([e \1! in]- [e \1!] Un +[in]) da= 0. (193.2) ~ 
Since this equation holds for any area on 6, and since the integrand, by hypothesis, is continuous, it must vanish. By using (185.6) we thus obtain Kotchine's 
theorem1 : At a singular surface, the generat balance (157.1) is equivalent to the 
condition 
[e\I!U]-[in]=O. (193-3) 
In this result, the source es of W plays no part. This phenomenon does not contradict 
the principle of the equivalence of surface and volume sources, stated in Sect. 15 7, since 
a condition for replacing the influx i by an equivalent supply 
es= - ik k isthat i be continuously differentiable throughout 
the inter{or of i', and in this case it follows that i is continuaus on ~. so that [in] = 0. 
Here we give only one example of the use of 
KoTCHINE's theorem. We assume that the principle of 
conservation of mass, in the form stated in Sect. 15 5, F~'f;. :~n~~g~~~n~~r a~":i~~~~~rof 
holds also for material volumes containing a singular surface. 
surface. Then we may put \1! = 1 and i [\I! J = 0. Substituting these assumptions into (193-3) yields the same result (189.14) that was 
derived from different concepts in Sect. 189. 
It follows that we may always express (193-3) in the form 
(193.4) 
The two derivations we have given for (189.14) must not be regarded as equivalent, 
for they rest upon different definitions of what is meant by conservation of mass at a shock 
wave. The derivation given in Sect. 189 employs the identity (189.12), which is a corollary 
of the geometrical and kinematical conditions of compatibility; conservation of mass is 
then taken to mean that the density e is so adjusted that [e dv] = 0, this being a natural 
extension of the postulate (156.1). In the present section we have postulated instead that 
for any material volume "'1', irrespective of whether or not it contains a shock wave, f e dv 
-r 
remains constant in time. That the two postulates, while consistent, are not equivalent, 
is made yet more clear by observing that the proof in this section goes through in just the 
same way if there is a bounded mass supply es and a continuous mass influx i, in the sense 
used in Sect. 157. In these circumstances the usual continuity equation is replaced by 
( 193.5) 
at interior points, but on the shock wave the jump condition (189.14) still holds. Thus 
(189.14), while a necessary and sufficient condition that e dv remain constant in crossing 
the shock, is only a necessary but not sufficient condition that mass be conserved in every 
material volume, however small, through which the shock is propagated. 
194. Impulsive balance. The general balance (157.1) may be integrated with 
respect to t to yield 12 f e I{! d v - f e I{! d v = J {- ~ da . i + f e s d v} d t, ( 194.1) Vt2 "'tl lz dt Vt 
where v 1 is the spatial volume occupied at time t by the material volume "Y 
and where d1 is the bounding surface of v 1• When I{! is discontinuous at a certain 
I KoTCHINE [1926, 3, § 3]. Special cases due to earlier authors will be given in Sects. 205 
and 241. KoTeEINE called (193.3) "!es conditions dynamiques de compatibilite", following 
the terminology used earlier in a special case by ZEMPLEN [1905, 7, p. 438]. 
528 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 194. 
instant t, where t{~t~t , the form {157.1) loses meaning, but (194.1}, with the 
time integral regarded as a Stieltjes integral, may then be taken as a postulate 
replacing it. That is, 
12 
Je W dv- Je W dv = J {-~da· di +Je ds dv}. ~~2 "ti IJ 41 "' 
(194.2} 
This form may be regarded as a fully general statement of any law of balance. 
If W suffers a jump discontinuity as a function of t, so that W (:r, t + 0} and 
W (:r, t- 0) are continuously differentiable functions of :r, the quantity W is 
said to experience an impulse. We write 
-[W} = W (:r, t + 0} - W (:r, t - 0). (194.3) 
From {194.2), by the rule for differentiating a Stieltjes integral, it follows that 
{Je W dv ]- = -~da· k +Je h dv, .,, "' .. , (194.4} 
where k [W] is an integrable field defined upon d1 and h [W J is an integrable quantity defined over v 1• We may call k and h the impulsive influx and the impulsive 
supply of W. The remarks made in Sect. 15 7 are applicable here, mutatis 
mutandis. 
Now how the particles X are regarded as behaving in an impulse is only a 
matter of convention. It is all one whether we choose to regard all the particles 
as jumping instantly to different places, where the velocity is different, or as 
staying fast but instantly gaining a new velocity. Henceforth we lay down 
the convention that in an impulse, the particles stand still. Therefore 
-[:r}=O, -[dv}=O; {194.5} 
hence 
{ J (! W d V} = J -[(! W ]- d V. .,, .", {194.6} 
If we assume further that mass is not impulsively created, we have 
-[e dv]- = o. (194.7) 
From {194.5) 2 it follows that 
{e]- = o, (194.8) 
and hence 
{Je W dv]- = f e-[W]-dv ", .,, (194.9) 
[cf. (156.8)]. 
Combining (194.9) and (194.4) yields 
f e-[W]-dv =-~da· k + f ehdv, (194.10} .,, "' .... , 
this being the impulsive analogue of the general balance (157.1). By applying 
GREEN's transformation to (194.10), when e -[W]-. kP, kq,q• and eh are assumed 
Sect. 194A. Appendix to Chapter C: Remarks on other definitions ofwaves. 529 
continuous, we obtain the generat impulsive balance1 : 
n{W} =- divk + nh, or {w···} =- k··q + h .. . 0: 0: (! ... . .. ,q (! ... . ( 194.11) 
The analogy to (157.5) and (157.6) is immediate. 
l94A. Appendix to Chapter C: Remarks on other definitions of waves and discontinuities. 
In particular theories of materials two other definitions of waves andjor discontinuities frequently appear: characteristic manifolds and harmonic oscillations. 
Given a particular and determinate system of partial differential equations which is linear 
in the highest derivatives occurring, prescription of the values of the derivatives of lower 
order upon a surface element of appropriate dimension generally determines unique values 
for all the highest derivatives. Particular surface elements on which this is not so are called 
characteristic elements. lf the characteristic elements envelope a surface, this surface may 
serve as the common boundary of two solutions that are otherwise independent of one another. 
Thus characteristic surfaces resemble singular surfaces. 
Now the generat principles of physics are always expressed by underdetermined systems. 
A determinate system results only by the adoption of constitutive equations defining a 
particular material (cf. Sect. 7). Thus it is clear that the theory of characteristics cannot 
be a consequence of the generat principles of physics. It is possible to develop the theory of 
characteristics in very general terms, but this theory, independent of all physical principles, 
becomes a part of pure mathematics. On both counts, it would be inappropriate to present 
this theory here. 
It should be remarked, however, that in the various common theories of fluids and elastic 
or plastic bodies, definite relations between characteristic surfaces and singular surfaces 
exist. In some theories, singular surfaces are always characteristic surfaces; in others, never; 
in still others, sometimes. Some theories in which singular surfaces are possible have no 
real characteristic surfaces. Characteristic surfaces need not be, and in general are not, 
singular surfaces. This is further evidence that the theory of characteristics is special in 
respect to the principles of physics, since singular surfaces, as we have seen, may be envisaged 
in the greatest generality and are governed by purely kinematical restrictions in addition to 
dynamical and energetic ones to be derived in Sects. 205 and 241, besides such others as 
may result from particular constitutive equations. 
The situation is somewhat similar with respect to infinitesimal oscillations. These are 
obtained by assuming, in the differential equations of a particular theory, that the acceleration fi may justifiably be replaced by iJ2ujot2 , where u is the displacement at :r, t; such 
motions are slow in the sense defined in Sect. 100. The equations, by one means or another, 
are then replaced "approximately" by linear ones, so that 
'· fJ2u 
ßj2=L(u), (194A.1) 
where L (u) is a linear differential expression in space derivatives. It may then be expected 
that there are solutions of the form U=S coswt satisfying 
L(s) + w2 s = o. (194A.2) 
From boundary conditions result limitations on the 1-ossible values of the circular frequency w, 
implying that these infinitesimal motions propagate at definite speeds. In many theories, 
these speeds turn out to be exactly the same as those possible for certain kinds of propagating 
singular surfaces andjor characteristic surfaces. This is the case in regard to !arge classes of 
motions of elastic solids and perfect fluids, the common speeds being called speeds of sound; 
also in respect to electromagnetic theories, where they are called speeds of light. No explanation of this remarkabl"e agreement is known 2• 
1 In principle, this result is due to KoTCHINE [1926, 3, § 3], who considered a more general 
singular surface in space-time, allowing for the possibility of an impulse combined with a 
singular surface in space, an impulse confined to a line, etc. Since such complexities have 
not yet appeared in applications, and since KoTcHINE's greater generality is purchased with 
the expense of an intricate proof, we have thought it sufficient to consider spatial singular 
surfaces and volume impulses separately in Sect. 193 and the present section, taking advantage 
of the almost trivial proofs which thus become possible. 2 Of course, in the particular classical theories to which the text refers, the explanation 
is almost trivial, since the operator L(u) is totally hyperbolic and hence can be put into the 
normal form 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. lll/t. 34 
530 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The C!assical Field Theories. Sect. 195· 
D. Stress. 
195. Scope and plan of the chapter. This chapter presents the general theory 
of momentum and moment of momentum, or, equivalently, of force and torque, 
in classical mechanics. 
Subchapter I introduces Euler's laws of mechanics; these integral relations 
express for an entire body, whether solid, superficial, lineal, or punctual in form, 
the balance of momentum and of moment of momentum. This formulation 
emphasizes the properties of classical mechanics distinguishing it from other 
physical theories: Space is presumed to be Euclidean, allowing finite parallel 
transport of vectors, and the statements of the mechanical laws distinguish the 
particular dass of Euclidean frames called inertial frames. 
The rest of the chapter is an exhaustive exposition of the properties of the 
stress tensor, the characteristic dynamical quantity of the mechanics of continua. 
In Subchapter II the stress principle is stated, whence follow the basic differential 
equations, called Cauchy's laws of motion, as well as jump conditions at singular 
surfaces. The next subchapter concerns applications of these laws to determine 
consumption of power, mean values of the stress, etc. Subchapter IV is a treatise 
on general solutions of CAUCHY's laws by means of stress functions. The last 
subchapter explains alternative variational principles. 
Aftermajor but special preliminary work by ]AMES BERNOULLI (1691-1704), 
]OHN BERNOULLI (1742), and EuLER (1749-1771), the general theory was created 
by CAUCHY (1823-1829); important special results were obtained by PIOLA 
(1835-1845), SIGNORINI (1930-1933), and B. FINZI (1934). 
While every textbook on elasticity or plasticity makes some show of presenting the general theory of stress, no reasonably comprehensive exposition has 
ever been published before1• 
where c = c (x) and where the dots stand for an expression involving derivatives of at most 
the first order. For a surface across which u and its first derivatives are continuous, from 
(194A.1) we then have 
Aswasremarked byHuGONIOT [1887. 2, Prem. Part.,§ 7] and, DuHEM [1891, 3, Ch. IX § 11], 
comparison with (181.9) 5 and (181.10)3 shows at once that 
The speed of displacement is ± c. The same result follows also by the method of characteristics. In these theories, the speeds of displacement and propagation are exactly or approximately equal. 
In the method of infinitesimal oscillations, a solution of the spatial equation 
is said to be a wave-form of wave-length l. While the terms are motivated by the one-dimensional case when L(s) = c2s", the nature and existence of wave forms is no trivial matter. 
lf such solutions exist, from (194A.2) it follows that c2=w2[2j(4n2); hence Un= ±wlj(2n) = 
± vl. Q.E.D. While for the simpler theories, which rest upon the wave equation itself, the 
method of infinitesimal osillations yields many easily soluble cases, for more complicated 
theories it does not seem to be practicable, but the method of characteristics and the method 
of singular surfaces Iead easily to precise results. 
The theory of singular surfaces for (194A.1) was initiated by HuGONIOT [1886, 3]. 
1 Even the treatises of the last century are astonishingly superficial on this subject. A 
reliable brief account of some of the essentials in our Subchapter II is given by LovE [1906, 
5, Chap. II]. Much of the material in our Subchapter V may be found in the article of HELLINGER [1914, 4]. No more than isolated details from the contents of our Subchapters 111 
and IV are given in any other expository work. 
Sect. 196. The laws of classical mechanics. 531 
I. The balance of momentum. 
196. The laws of classical mechanics. Without attempting an axiomatic presen• 
tation1 (cf. Sect. 3) of the subject, we lay down statements summarizing the practice 
of classical mechanics. To the undefined objects that occur in kinematics, 
namely, particle, position, time, and mass, are added two more: the force iJ and 
the torque f acting upon bodies. These quantities are vector measures, defined 
over bodies and their measurable parts: 
il=fdi}, f=f(pxdi}+df). (196.1) 
r r 
iJ is an absolute vector, f an axial vector; these vectors are known a priori and 
are the same for alt observers. In their prescription consists the specification of 
a particular dynamical problem; this prescription is equally available and invariant to all observers, whatever their relative motion. When the measures 
occurring in (196.1) are discrete, they are appropriate to mass points; when 
continuous, to continuous media; the fully general case represents a partly continuous, partly discrete body subject to loads concentrated at points, lines, and 
surfaces as well as distributed continuously throughout its interior. 
The torque f consists in two parts: the moment J p X d lj of the force distribution taken with respect to the origin of the position vector p, and the couple 
J d f. Thus, properly, the torque should be called the torque with respect to the 
origin, and when the distinction of origins is important, weshall write f[0 l, f[O'l, 
etc. To consider the effect of change of origin, we set p = b +p' and conclude 
from (196.1 )1 2 that 
f[O] = bXi} + f[O'l, ( 196.2) 
so that the difference of the torques with respect to 0 and 0' is the moment of 
the total force, thought of as concentrated at 0', with respect to 0. 
Let ~ be the momentum and ~ the moment of momentum, with respect 
to the origin of the position vector p, of the body 1/. Then the postulated laws 
of classical mechanics, or Euler's laws 2, assert that there exists a frame in 
which 
(196.3) 
for every body "F. These two equations express the balance of momentum and 
the balance of moment of momentum, respectively. It is important to recall 
that since each measurable part of a body is also a body, these equations apply 
not only to the body as a whole but also to every part, no matter how the body 
be subdivided. 
The pair of quantities ~. ~ in any frame, constitute the reaction of the body, 
while i}, f constitute the load. EuLER's laws may be read as a statement that 
in an inertial frame, the reaction of any body is equal to the load acting upon it. 
In Sect. 197 we shall see that (196.3) does not hold in frames which are not 
inertial. 
1 However, our treatment has been influenced by the system of axioms given by NoLL 
[1957, 11] [1958, 8] [1959, 9]. For older work, see Special Bibliography P at the end of the 
treatise. 2 EuLER [1776, 2, §§ 26-28] (while the memoir concerns rigid bodies, Eqs. (196.3) 
are expressly stated to hold for arbitrary bodies). Earlier [1752, 2, §§ 20-22], EuLER had 
given a local formula equivalent to (196.3h· Cf. also KIReRHOFF [1876, 2, Eilfte Vorl., § 1]. 
It should be, but unfortunately it is not, unnecessary to comment that the laws of NEWTON 
[1687, 1] are neither unequivocally stated nor sufficiently general to serve as a foundation 
for continuum mechanics. See the scholion at thc end of this section. 
34* 
532 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 196. 
From the postulate (196.3) it follows that force and torque have the physical 
dimensions 
dimiJ = [ML T-2], dim.~ = [ML2T-2J. (196.4) 
The balance of moment of momentum should properly be written ~[OJ = ~[OJ 
to indicate the role of the origin 0. To establish its invariance with respect to 
change of origin, we note from (196.2) and (167.5) that 
~[Ol_ ~[OJ = b X iJ + ~[O'l_ b X'- ~[O'l = ~[O'l_ ~[O'l' (196.5) 
by (196.3h· It follows then that when linear momentum is balanced, the balance 
of moment of momentum with respect to one origin implies the balance of moment 
of momentum with respect to all origins. In this statement it is understood that 
all "origins" are stationary in the framein which the laws (196.3) hold. Thus 
the choice of origin is immaterial, and we shall generally omit the superscript 0. 
The static case of ( 196.3) may be read as follows: In orderfor a body to remain 
motionless in an inertial frame, it is necessary and sufficient that the total force 
and torque acting upon every part of it vanish. To express the general case in 
statical terms, we may say that the rates -' and - ~ are the etfective force 
and eflective torque arising from motion. This statement may be called the EulerD'Alembert principle1• 
From Eqs. (196.3) and (167.1), mass being assumed invariant, we have 
iJ = mc: (196.6) 
The center of mass of any body moves as a mass-point, of mass equal to the mass 
of the body and subject to the total force acting on the body 2• No correspondingly 
simple statement holds exactly for the effect of the torque, but from NYBORG's 
theorem (170.16) we may assert that in first approximation the torque is proportional to the curl of the acceleration. 
The particular framein which the laws (196.3) hold is called an inertial frame. 
The class of inertial frames will be delimited in Sect. 197. Thus the physical 
assumption basic to classical dynamics is that there exists a special frame in 
which observers may prescribe the rates of change of momentum and moment 
of momentum. The nature of this prescription is difficult to render definite in 
a fashion broad enough to cover all cases occurring in practice yet narrow enough 
to delimit the subject. Usually it consists in a relation, possibly elaborate, 
between the forces and torques acting on a bdayand the motion it experiences. 
Further progress is made by distinguishing yarious types of forces and the 
prescriptions available for them. The developinent of continuum mechanics 
within this framework is taken up in Sect. 199. Herewe append some explanations regarding other views of mechanics. We remark also that much of what 
1 This principle, only a rewording of EuLER's laws ( 196.3), while sometimes called 
"D' ALEMBERT's principle" is different in spirit and in detail from the principle asserted by 
D' ALEMBERT [1743, 2, § 50]: Force is only a name for the product of acceleration by mass, 
and the system of forces corresponding to all the constraints is a system in static equilibrium. 
The idea that motion gives rise to an effective force equal to the negative of the product 
of mass by acceleration and that both the resultant and the static moment of the augmented 
forces must vanish may be traced back through special cases occurring in the early work of 
EULER and DANIEL BERNOULLI to a fundamental paper of J AMES BERNOULLI ( 1703). For 
still a different "D'ALEMBERT's principle", see Sect. 232. 2 Special cases were proved on the basis of various specializing hypotheses by NEWTON 
[1687, 1, Coroll. IIII to The Laws of Motion], D'ALEMBERT [1743, 2, § 66], and EuLER 
[1765, 1, § § 280, 290]. According to EDLER [1765, 3, § Il], the generallaw (196.6) "is proved 
in mechanics ", but the earliest general proof we have found is that of LAGRANGE [1788, 1, 
Seconde Partie, 3me Sect., 'II 3]. 
Sect. 196A. lnertial frames. Newton's third Iaw. 533 
would seem the insuperable difficulty of identifying an inertial frame is removed 
in the practice of continuum mechanics by requiring the form of constitutive 
equations (Sect. 7) tobe the samein all frames, whether ornot inertial (cf. Sect. 293 C). 
196A. Scholion. a.) On inertial frames. The difficulty of identifying an inertial frame by 
experiment is weil known. This difficulty, however, is not reflected in the formalism of the 
subject. Rather, it arises from the fact that in practice force is generally measured by acceleration; that is, by the balance of linear momentum in the form (196.6). If this is the 
case, in order to determine the force one must first, and independently, verify that hisframe 
is inertial, which results in a circularity. This is a problern of interpretation, not of formalism, 
and need not concern us here. 
Were mechanics restricted to dynamical problems, the circularity could be avoided by regarding ( 196.3) as the definitions of force and torque, as was advocated by D' ALEMBERT and KIReHHOFF. An inertial frame is then one in which, for example, a small massy sphere fixed to the end 
of a light horizontal spring suffers no acceleration beyond that proportional to the extension 
of the spring. This view is supported by the recognition that much of what is called dynamics 
in paedagogical treatments consists in memorized vocabulary. For example, when the student 
is told to find the motion of three pendulums connected by springs, he is expected to remernher 
that "pendulum" means a point constrained to move on a fixed sphere with an additional 
constant three-dimensional acceleration; that "spring" means an acceleration proportional to 
the distance between two points. Unless the contrary is stated explicitly, the observer is 
assumed situate in an inertial frame. In other words, the student acquires a set of terms 
which, while based on abstraction from physical experience, are in fact prescriptions of 
accelerations in a preferred frame. In continuum mechanics, the a priori knowledge concerning the forces may be more elaborate. "Perfeet fluid" means "the stress tensor is spherical"; 
ideal materials may be defined by integro-differential equations connecting the acceleration 
with other quantities, etc. But in all cases, the practice of dynamics begins with an a priori 
statement regarding the force and torque, or, equivalently, the mass density and the acceleration, in an inertial frame. 
Against this view stands the whole science of statics, wherein the discourse is always 
of forces that produce no acceleration. In a mechanics general enough to include statics must 
occur not only the resultant force and torque that enter the Eqs. (196.3) but also systems 
of forces exerted by the parts of a body upon each other. 
ß) On mutual forces and Newton's third law. In the more extensive set of assumptions 
required for statics 1, to each part !J4 of a body is associated a vector measure fd'iJEf, and for 
each measurable set <(! within the part !J4 we call 
'iJEr(<(f) """J d'i§Er (196A.1) 
'{;' 
the portion of the force over !J4 that is exerted on <(/. What we have above called force, the 
quantity that enters the fundamental law ( 196.3)r, is then 'i§Er (!JI), the resultant force on !JI. 
The broader concept (196A.1) enables us to speak of cases when the resultant force on !J4 
vanishes, or is balanced by rate of change of momentum, though the portion of force over !J4 
exerted upon a part <(! does not vanish or is not balanced. A similar extension is made for 
torque. 
If !JI1 and !Jis are two disjoint parts of a body, then the resultant mutual force 'i§911912 
exerted on !JI1 by !Jis is given by the definition 
'iJEr1 Er2 = 'ifEr1 (!Jil)- 'iJEr1 u Ef2 (!Jil), (196A.2) 
that is, the resultant force on !J41 less the portion of the force over !J41 and !J42 tagether that 
is exerted on !J41 • 
On the basis of this definition, we may show that when there are no surface, line, or 
point forces acting within either of the disjoint parts !J41 and !J42 , then it is a consequence of 
the balance of linear momentum that 
(196A.3) 
The sum of the mutual jorces exerted by any two parts of a body on each other is zero. This property of mutual forces is sometimes called the principle of action and reaction, or Newton's 
third law2 • 
1 NoLL [1957, 11, § 2]. 2 The name is merely traditional, as the statement of NEWTON [1687, 1, Lex 3] is so 
vague as to be only suggestive, while subsequent writers apply this name sometimes to 
(196A.3), sometimes to (196A.8), and sometimes to broader ideas but tenuously related to 
the formal science of mechanics. The precise statement and proof given above are due to 
NoLL [1957, 11, § 6]. 
534 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 196A. 
Indeed, from the definition (196A.2) we have 
~ .. , .. 2 + ~ .. 2 ar, =~ .. ,(Bi',) + ~ .. 2 (als) - ~ai'z u ai'z (ai'l) - ~ai'z u "'2 (ai'z). (196A.4) 
The above-specified absence of singular Ioads enables us to replace the last two terms by 
~ai'zUal' (ai' Uai' ). Each term on the right-hand side is now a resultant force, so that the 
balance of linear momentum (196.3h may be applied to each. Therefore 
(196A.s) Q.E.D. 
For the mutual force between mass-points not subject to a couple, the balance of moment 
of momentum (196.3)1 implies that tke mutual force is directed along tke line joining tke two 
points 1• To see this, Iet the external and mutual forces, respectively, be ~Q and ~Qb, and 
write the balance of linear momentum for each mass-point separately: 
(196A.6) 
Since only the resultant force on each part enters the balance of moment of momentum, 
for the body consisting of the two mass-points we have 
~x~+~x~=~x~~+~x~~. l 
= Pz X (~, + ~12) + P2 X (~s + ~zz) • 
= Pz X ~1 + Ps + ~2 + (pz- P2l X ~12 • 
by Eqs. (196A.6) and (196A.3). Hence follows 
(p,- Pz) X ~12= 0. 
Q.E.D. 
(196A.7) 
(196A.8) 
It is thus shown that "NEWTON's laws" for mass-points, with the third law being taken 
as an assertion that the mutual forces between pairs of mass-points are pairwise equilibrated 
and central, follow from EuLER's fundamental equations (196.3). It is obvious that the 
converse problern of derivation of EuLER's laws (196.3) from NEWTON's laws cannot even 
be stated meaningfully without severe restrictions. Nevertheless, the mass-point is so 
ingrained in paedagogical repetition that even today many textbooks strive to foster an 
illusion that NEWTON's laws suffice as a basis for mechanics. 
The special nature of the usual arg~ment is best seen by presenting it. The forces are 
all taken as absolutely continuous functions of mass and are restricted to be external forces fp 
and mutual forces fPQ only, where P and Q refer to the mass-bearing points. That is, the 
resultant force and torque are given by 
~= flpd'.mp+ f f [p 0 d'.m0 d'.mp. ) "/"' "/"'"/"' 
ß = f pp X [p d'JJlp + f [PP X f [pQ d'.mo] d'JJlp. "/"' "/"' "/"' 
(196A.9) 
lf (196A.3) holds, the firstdouble integral vanishes; if in addition (196A.8) holds, the second 
double integral vanishes, and ( 196.3)2 follows from ( 196.3h. 
In this argument, the masses may be discrete or continuous. However, the forms ( 196A.9) 
are not sufficiently general for continuum mechanics, where, while the consideration of 
mutual forces is unusual, the occurrence of surface forces, not depending continuously upon 
the distribution of mass, is the rule. The basic law ( 196.3)2 of balance of moment of momentum 
assumes for continuum mechanics a form far different from that of NEWTON's third law 
for mass-points, as will be seen in Sects. 203 and 205. 
y) Classification of forces and torques. The simpler problems of mechanics concern 
prescriptions of ~ and ß which do not depend explicitly upon the velocity p, the acceleration ji, 
or the higher accelerations (~). Forcesand torques of this kind are called frictionless, while 
reactions depending upon p are called frictional. There have been many attempts to relegate 
frictional reactions to mere appearances or approximations; particularly in statistical mechanics, it is often sought to show that they arise from an incomplete or approximate description of problems governed in fact by frictionless reactions. These efforts have found only 
limited success. In any case, in the practice of continuum mechanics many of the most 
interesting theories concern frictional forces. In some of the more recent theories, reactions 
depending upon the accelerations ji, ... , (~) occur; such reactions may be called kyperfrictional. 
1 NOLL [1957. 11, § 10]. 
Sect. 197. Apparent forces and torques. 535 
The foregoing classification of reactions follows conventional notions but does not deserve 
to be perpetuated in continuum mechanics, where ij and 1! are specified in terms of the stress 
tensort {cf. Sect. 200), for which in turn a functional dependence is prescribed. If, for example, 
that functional dependence is of the form i = f(p), it is not legitimate to infer that ij is prescribed in terms of p, or of p, and the conventional classification cannot be applied. 
197. Apparent forces and torques. In an inertial frame, EuLER's laws (196.3) 
assert that the load ij, ~ on a body equals its reaction !j;, ~- Since, as already 
asserted, ij and ~ are the same for all observers, while !j; and ~ do not enjoy 
this invariance, it follows that EuLER's laws are not an invariant statement of 
the principles of mechanics. Indeed, by the results of Sect. 171 we may express 
the Galilean principle oj relativity as follows: The reaction of each body is the 
same for two observers if and only if their frames belong to the same Galilean class; 
in particular, the class of inertial frames is a Galilean class. 
Letting ~', ~'[ '1 be the reaction in an arbitrary frame, by (196.3h and (171.1) 
we have 
~' = ij- 9J1 (c - c') = ij + ilt + ilr (197.1) 
where 
-i}1 9Jlb, -ilr-ffi1[wxc'+2wxc'+wx(wxc')]. (197.2) 
By (196.3) 2 , (196.2), (170.11), and (170.12) follows 
~•[0'] = ~[0] + ~c + ~.. l 
= ~[0']_ (~[0]_ ~[O'l) + ~c + ~ .. =~[O'l+bxi}+~c+~r• (1973.) 
= ~[O'] + ~t + ~r• 
where 
- ~t = - b X iJ - ~c = c' X ffi1 b = - c' X ilt, ) 
- ~r = w · ~·[O'J + W · il•[O'J + W X ~·[O'J + W X ~·[O'J · w. ( 197.4) 
Thus if we were to regard the primed frame as one in which the laws of mechanics 
(196.3) hold, we should have to say that the body is subject not only to the real 
load ~. ~. but also to the apparent force 1 ~t+~r and the apparent torque ~t+~r· 
In all these formulae, dots on primed quantities indicate time rates as apparent 
to an observer in the primed frame. 
The minus signs occur in {197.2) and {197.4) because we follow the tradition of using 
the position vector b of 0' with respect to the unprimed frame, and the angular velocity of 
the primed frame with respect to the unprimed frame. Introduction of the corresponding 
quantities with respect to the primed frame, viz b' ~ - b and w'"" - w, so that b' = - b, w' = - w, removes the minus signs except from the centripetal terms w' x (w' x c') and 
w' x .3' [ O'J · w'. 
In the apparent reaction the subscripts t and r distinguish the portians arising 
from translation and rotation, respectively. It is only a rephrasing of the Galilean 
principle of relativity to remark that when w =.?• a necessary and sufficient 
condition that the apparent reaction be zero is b = 0. More generally, to an 
observer in the primed frame iit and 21 equal, respectively, the momentum and 
the moment of momentum about the origin of a mass-point of mass ffi1, located 
1 A verbal statement of the principle of apparent forces was given by CLAIRAUT [1745, 1, 
Art. I,§ I]; clearer statements are due to EuLER [1752, 3, Probl. 1] [1756, 1, §21] [1757, 3, 
§§ 33-34] (and many other papers). While EuLER used the principle correctly to solve 
special problems, notably in his analysis of fluid motion in a turbine and in his theory of 
rigid bodies, the correct general equations rest upon the full theorem of CoRIOLIS. Cf. Sect. 143. 
536 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 198, 199· 
at the center of mass, and enjoying the same instantaneous acceleration as does 
the origin of the unprimed frame. In orderthat ~t=O, by (197.4)1 it is necessary 
and sufficient that to an observer at the origin of the primed frame the accelerations of the origin of the unprimed frame appear to be in the direction of the 
radius vector to the center of mass1. It is sufficient, but not necessary that the 
origin of one frame be unaccelerated with respect to the other, orthat the origin 
of the primed frame be at the center of mass. When the .motion is rigid and the 
primed frame is rigidly attached to the body, the second and third summands 
in (197.4) 2 vanish. 
198. Impulse. The laws (196.3) are suitable only to motions in which the 
velocity exists and is integrable. There are cases when we wish to regard a motion 
as started or altered instantaneously. There are then, generally, impulsive discontinuities -[qJ]- and -[4}]- in qJ and 4}, where the symbol-[ ]-is defined by (194.3). 
In analogy to (196.3), for an impulse suffered at time t we write 
Bi- -[qJ]- = f -[_p]- diDl, ~ = -[4}]- = f px -[p]- diDl. (198.1) ~ r 
Regarding the impulses 9l and ~. we make an assumption analogaus to the balance 
of momentum, namely, that we have a priori knowledge of them in an inertial 
frame. In particular, we assume that 9l = 0 and ~ = 0 except at a finite number 
of instants; at instants when 9l and ~ do not both vanish, an impulse is said 
to occur. We have 
dim9l =dimqJ = [MLT-1], dim~ =dim4} = [ML2T-1J. (198.2) 
Moreover, since by (143.3) follows {p} = -[p']-, the laws of impulse are valid for all observers. In all the foregoing statements it is assumed that the material 
itself does not jump about: -lp ]- = 0. 
We may include both (198.1) and (196.3) in the same equations by writing 
t I 
qJ(t)- qJ(t') = fijdt, 4}(t)- 4}(t') = J ~dt (198.3) t• t' 
and interpreting the integration in the Stieltjes sense. 
Since impulse consists in outright prescription of momentum and moment 
of momentum, there is little to be said regarding it. 
II. The stress principle. 
199. Extrinsic, mutual, and contact Ioads. There are three types of forces 
and torques: 
1. Extrinsic loads. These arise at least in part from outside the body and are 
regarded as acting upon the particles comprising the body. 
2. Mutual loads. These arise within the body and are regarded as acting 
upon pairs of particles. They were defined and discussed in Sect. 196Aß. 
3. Contact loads. These Ioads are not assignable as functions of position but 
are to be imagined as acting upon bounding surfaces, lines, or points in such a 
way as to be equipollent to the loading exerted by one portion of the material 
upon another. 
Examples of extrinsic Ioads are the fields of uniform gravity, electrostatics, 
or polarisation; of mutual Ioads, Newtonian gravitation or the forces between 
1 Cf. the references cited in Sect. 170. 
Sect. 200. The stress principle of EuLER and CAUCHY. 537 
charges; of contact loads, the stress field, to which the remainder of this 
chapter is devoted. 
In their effect upon motion the three types of loads are indiscernible, as 
follows from (196.3). For example, if two mass-points are subject only to their 
mutual gravitation, it is equally permissible to regard them as moving subject 
to specially adjusted time-dependent extrinsic forces. The distinction of forces, 
as may be expected from the a priori nature of force itself, classifies our knowledge 
of the circumstances of a body. Generally, a problern which is simple and hence 
natural when put in terms of contact loads becomes intricate and artificial if 
put in terms of mutual or extrinsic loads. 
200. The stress principle of EULER and CAUCHY1• The stress principle specifies 
the nature of the contact load 2• It asserts that upon any imagined closed diaphragm !/ within a body there exists a field of stress vectot·s t(n), where n is the 
unit normal; this field is equipollent to the loads exerted by the material outside 
upon the material inside, or, in case !/ is a boundary, to the applied loads. If 
we let I be the field of extrinsic and mutual forces per unit mass, or, as we shall 
say henceforth, the assigned force, the stress principle assumes the form 3 
iJ = ~ t(n) da + j 1 d m = ~~ j p d m = ', (200.1) 
[/' "Y "Y 
~ = ~ p X t(n) da + f p X I d m = :t f p X p d m = ~' (200.2) 
[/' "Y "Y 
where for convenience we have repeated the content of ( 196.3). Since t(n) represents 
the effect of the material outside on the material inside, it is a tension if it subtends an acute angle with the unit outward normal n; if an obtuse angle, a pressure. 
The projection of t(n) upon n is called the normal stress or normal tension on 
the surface element normal to n; the projection of t(n) upon the plane normal 
to n, the shearing stress on the element. If the normal stress is zero, the element 
1s said to be subject to pure shearing stress; if the shearing stress is zero, to pure 
1 The notion of stress arose in special cases in theories of flexible, elastic, and fluid bodies. 
The general concept and mathematical theory are due to CAUCHY [1823, 1] [1827, 1, 
pp. 60- 61]. 
The following principal steps may be extracted from the detailed historical accounts of • 
TRUESDELL [1954, 25, Parts II and IV] [1960, 4, §§ 7, 11, 14, 19, 58, 59, 64]; cf. also [1956, 21]. 
That the action of one part of a flexible line upon its neighbor is equipollent to a tangent 
vector at the junction, after being tacitly assumed in special cases by GALILEJO (1638) and 
PARDIES (1673), was given general mathematical form by JAMES BERNOULLI (1691-1704) 
and HERMANN (1716). The need for interior shear stress (Sect. 204) in a terminally loaded 
beam, while seen by PARENT (1713), was first analysed by CouLOMB [1776, 1, §V]. That 
the action of a portion of fluid in a tube upon a neighboring portion is equipollent to a vector 
normal to the plane face separating them is the basic assumption of J OHN BERNOULLI's 
hydraulics [1743, 1, Part I, § 1] and is fully elaborated in EuLER's hydraulic researches 
( 1749-17 52). These led to EuLER's three-dimensional hydrodynamics, where the diaphragm 
is of arbitrary form but the stress vector is assumed tobe normal to it [1757, 1, §§ 6-9]. 
The mathematical theory of resultant shear on a plane deformable line was given by EULER 
[1771, 2, §§ 1-11, 35-40]. 
CAUCHY's general theory is obtained by adopting the common features and discarding 
the special aspects of the foregoing theories. 
The history of the term "stress ", which was introduced by RANKINE [1856, 1, § 2], haS 
been written by MuiRHEAD [1901, 10]. 
2 A general theory of contact forces is constructed by NoLL [1958, 8, § 6]. 
3 KIRCHHOFF [1876, 2, Vor!. 11, §§ 1-2]. CAUCHY had used equivalent local postulates. 
538 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 201. 
normal stress. If.t(n) is always parallel to n and of magnitude independent of n, 
so that t(n) = - P n, where P is a scalar independent of n, the stress is hydrostatic. 
In (200.2), all torques arise from forces. To remove this restriction of generality we allow in addition a field of assigned couples 1 l and a couple stress 2 m(n)• 
so that (200.2) is replaced by 
~ = p (m(n) + p X t(n)) da + f (l + p X f} d 1m. (200.3) [/' -r 
Most work in continuum mechanics concerns the non-polar case, defined as that 
in which 
l =0, m =0. (200.4) 
201. Concentrated Ioads. Eqs. (200.1) to (200-3) presume the entire mechanical 
action to arise from fields which are continuous, or at least integrable, over the 
interior or the surface of the body. Sometimes in addition we wish to take 
account of concentrated loads Ia and la, acting at q individual points Pa. The 
corresponding extensions of (200.1) and (200.3), included within the scheme 
of Sect. 196, are 
i} = 
.</' 
pt(n)da + 
-r 
Jldlm + a~l 
~ Ia, l 
(201.1) 
~ = p (m(n) + p X t(n)) da + J (l + p X I) d m + ~ (la +Pa X Ia) . .</' -r a~l 
Usually the points Pa are either within "Y or on its surface !/'. It is left to the 
reader to generalize (201.1) to so as to allow distributions of assigned loads upon 
particular curves or surfaces. 
While concentrated loads are hardly in the spirit of continuum mechanics, 
they provide a convenient idealization and are frequently used. Often they 
are regarded as limiting cases when the area or volume on which a distributed 
load acts is shrunk down to a point. In the theory of any particular ideal material, it is an analytical question, and often a difficult one, to determine whether 
solutions possessing singularities of this type exist and are the Iimits, unique 
or not, of certain families of regular solutions. Such problems are outside our 
scope. Let it suffice that any such singular solutions in order to be acceptable 
must be consistent with the generallaws of mechanics (196.3), where i} and ~ 
are given by (201.1). To this limited extent, there is no difficulty in including 
concentrated loads without special distinction, simply by writing (200.1) and 
(200-3) in terms of Stieltjes integrals. General theorems following from these 
laws are of two kinds. For results concerning finite Portions of matter, the device 
mentioned allows us to include concentrated loads with no extra effort. However, 
difficulties arise in the proofs of local theorems, to which much of this chapter 
is devoted. When a concentrated load occurs, the point at which it acts is a 
singularity, and the behavior of the stress vector nearby cannot be rendered 
definite without additional assumptions, such as those appropriate to special 
theories of materials. 
1 MAXWELL [1873, 5, § 641]; cf. LARMOR [1892, 7], COMBEBIAC [1902, 2]. DUHEM [1904, 
1, Part I, Chap. II, §§I-V] [1911, 4, Chap. XIV] obtained couples by supposing the mutual 
forces not Newtonian. 2 VOIGT [1887, 5, Chap. I, § 2], [1895, 7]. Cf. E. and F. CossERAT [1909, 5, §53], 
HEUN [1913, 4, § 21 a], GüNTHER [1958, 4, § 3]. The necessity of couple stresses in certain 
physical circumstances is emphasized by KRÖNER [1960, 3, § 2]. 
Sect. 202. The reaction on bounding surfaces. 539 
We therefore lay down the following convention regarding concentrated loads: 
1. For local theorems, we assume there are no concentrated loads in a neighborhood of the point in question. 
2. For integral theorems, concentrated loads may be present, but we refrain 
from writing down the obvious additional terms that arise when (200.1) and 
(200.3) are replaced by (201.1). In particular examples, the readerwill supply 
these terms as needed. 
202. The reaction on bounding surfaces. If we combine (200.1) and (200.3) 
with (170.3)1 2 , we obtain1 
iJ.9'=~t<nlda=.f :t (ep)dv+~epp·da- .f1diDl, 
.9' -r .9' -r 
~.9'== ~ (m(n) + pxt(n)) da, (202.1) 
-J f,(Pxei>)d•+~pxei>i>·da- J(l+pxf)d!JJl. I 
-r .9' -r 
Thus iJ.9' and ~.9'. the force and torque exerted by the material outside !/ upon 
that inside, may be calculated from the fields 0 ~(! p) ' ~1!_ X e p, I and l within r 
and the field e p p on !/. öt t 
First, in steady motion within a stationary outlet 
vessel of any form, by (69.1) wegetfrom (202.1) 
iJ.9'=- fldiDl, 
~.9'= _!"J(l +pxl)diDl. (202.2) 
-r 
Thus the steady motion of a materialfilling a inlet 
closed stationary vessel has no reaction upon the Fig. 33. Material in steady llow through a pipe. 
vessel 2• 
Fora less trivial example 3, consider a material which is being forced in steady 
flow through a stationary pipe (Fig. 33). Suppose that l =0 and that I is the 
field of uniform gravity. If we take the normal to the inlet cross section .9{ 
inward, retaining that on the outlet cross section ~ as outward, then (202.1) 
reduces to 
il.9' = f e PP· da- f e PP· da-~. ) ~ .Y'i 
~.9' = f p x e p p · da - f p x e p p . da - m c x ~, 
9;, .Yj 
(202.3) 
where $ is the weight of the material in the pipe. Thus, no matter what the 
shape of the pipe or the nature of the material in it, from a knowledge of Im 
and of the density and velocity of the material at the inlet and outlet only, we 
can determine the total reaction on the material instantaneously occupying the 
pipe. Writing g;, for the surface constituting the pipe itself, by (202.3) and (202.1) 
1 In principle, these formulae are old. Apparently the first general discussion is that of 
V. MISES [1909, 8, § 9). A clear treatment is given by CISOTTI [1917, 4, §§ 1-4). Cf. LELLI 
[1925, 8 and 9], MüLLER [1933, 8]. 
2 CrsoTTI [1917, 4, § 7]. 
3 CISOTTI [1917, 4, § 8]. 
540 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 202. 
we obtain also 
Jt(n)da = J (t(n)da- e p p. da)- J(t(n)da- e PP· da)-~. 
9p .9'i .9"0 
f (m(n) + pXt(n))da = f [m(n)da + p X (t(n)da- (! p p ·da) - .9"p .9"1 (202.4) 
- f[m(n)da + px (t(n)da- e p p. da)- 9Jl cx ~ . .9"0 
Thus a knowledge of ~ and (!, p, t(n), and m(nl at the inlet and the outlet alone 
suffices to determine the reaction the pipe exerts upon the material. 
Consider next a single finite closed rigid boundary submerged and fixed in 
a continuous medium, and let .5I;; be an imagined control surface sufficiently 
large as to include all of [/ (Fig. 34). For simplicity, take f = 0, l = 0. So as to 
calculate the reaction exerted by the rigid obstacle on the material, we apply 
/-----......... 
/ ' / ' (D y \ I 
'- I ' / ............... ____ ,.../ 
Fig. 34. Reaction on a submerged 
rigid object. 
(202.1) to the material between [/ and 9';;, thus obtaining for the force and torque exerted by the obstacle the 
expressions1 
iJ = :t J pd!Dl +~e p p ·da- ~t(n) da, 
" .9'C .9'C 
f= Jpxpd9Jl+~PXepp·da-
" .9"c 
-~pxt(n)da. 
.9'C 
(202.5) 
The first terms represent the force and torque arising from local changes in velocity. In steady motion, they vanish, and (202.5) shows that then the reaction 
of a submerged body may be determined from the values of the stress vector, the velocity, and the density on a control surface far from the body. 
To calculate this reaction in the steady case, let V be any constant vector; 
then by mere algebraic identity we have 
~ e p p · da = ~ e (P - V) (P- V) · da + l ~ ~ 
+ ~e(P- V) da· V+ V~eP·da. 
~ ~ 
(202.6) 
Since e p is solenoidal in a steady motion, and since p is normal to the fixed 
boundary !/, application of GREEN's transformation to the integral of div(e p) 
over the region between [/ and .5I;; shows that the last summand vanishes. 
Thus (202.5h may be written 
iJ = ~ e(P- V)(p- V)· da+~ e(P- V) da· V-~ (t(nl + Pn)da, (202.7) 
~ ~ .9'j; 
where P is an arbitrary constant. This formula may be applied to the case 
when at great distances from the obstacle the material is moving at a uniform 
velocity V and the stress is hydrostatic. Indeed, from (202.7) we read off the 
1 For the classical special case of isochoric irrotational motion subject to hydrostatic 
pressure, see e.g. MILNE-THOMSON [ 1938, 9, § § 17.10- 1 7. 51] and the more general result of 
RASKIND [1956, 12]. 
Sect. 202. The reaction on bounding surfaces. 541 
generalform of the Euler-D'Alembert parado~ : Let a stationary rigid body be 
immersed in an infinite material in steady motion past it; if there exist constants V 
and P such that 
e (p - V) (p - V) = o (p-2), e (p - V) = o (p-2), t<nl + P n = o (p-2), (202.8) 
then the obstacle exerts no force on the material. Simple sufficient conditions are 
p- V= o (p-2), e = 0 (1), t<n> + Pn = o (p-2). (202.9) 
The result is extremely general: lf the velocity approaches its constant limit 
at oo sufficiently quickly, and if the stress vector approaches a uniform pressure 
at oo sufficiently quickly, the submerged body exerts no force. However, the 
"paradox" has limited application, as the order conditions (202.8), which are 
the very essence 2 of the assumptions underlying it, are rarely fulfilled in particular theories of materials. The classical example is homochoric irrotational flow 
of a perfect fluid, where (202.9) follows easily from theorems of potential theory. 
It is often asserted that in fact it is the adherence of materials to solid boundaries 
that accounts for the resistance to steady motion in real fluids. This may be so, 
but it does not enter the present argument directly. Indeed, if the stronger 
condition (69.4) were to replace (69.2) here, the most we could expect would 
be the annulling of further surface integrals, not the addition of extra terms. 
Rather, so far as is now known, taking account of adherence in conjunction 
with any dissipative mechanism has the effect of transmitting stronger disturbances to oo, sufficient to violate the order condition (202.8). 
There are various generalizations. If the material is confined by a stationary 
canal, from (202.6) we see that instead of integrating over all of ~, for the first 
two integrals in (202.7) we need consider only the cross sections of the canal 
at great distances, and again (202.8k 2 are sufficient to make these integrals 
vanish in the limit. To make the third integral vanish also, in addition to (202.8) 3 
we supply an appropriate assumption regarding the value of the stress vector 
on the canal walls 3• lf there are surfaces on which p is discontinuous, provided 
they do not extend to infinity, the result still holds 4 ; if, however, there are 
infinite shocks or slip surfaces, the resultant force in general is not zero 5• 
To calculate the torque, we note first that 
da · p (p Xe p) =da · (p- V)[p X(! (p- V)] + } 
) . • (202.10) +(da· V [pxe(P- V)]+ da· e ppx V. 
Now by GREEN's transformation and (69.2) and (156.6) we have 
f da· ePP = fdiv(epp)dv = Jpd!JR = 14§ (202.11) 
.9"c -r -I'" 
1 The result was asserted and proved correctly by EuLER [1745. 2, Satz I, Anm. 3] for 
steady plane flow of a perfect fluid, on the assumption that the stream lines straighten out 
at oo. D'XLEMBERT [1752, I, §§ 66-69] rediscovered or appropriated it; later [1768, 2, §I] 
he reasserted it in sensational terms and proved it by an argument assuming the body to 
consist in eight congruent parts. It has given rise to misunderstandings lasting over centuries. 
For the hydrodynamical case, a correct proof based on integral transformation was given 
by CtSOTTI [1906, 3]; we present, essentially, the reformulation by BOGGIO [1910, 2]. A 
variant argument based partly on the energy balance was suggested by DUHEM [1914, 2] 
and worked out by B. FtNZI [1926, 2]. 2 In the older treatments this is glossed over, but it is made clear by CtSOTTI [1917, 
4, § 9]. 
3 CISOTTI [1909, 4]. 
& DUHEM [1914, 2 and 3], PICARD [1914, 9], MANARINI [1948, 14] [1949, 17]. 5 Examples were given by HELMHOLTZ and others; a general discussion is presented by 
JouGUET and Rov [1924, 7]. 
542 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 203. 
where !f3 is the momentum of the material between !I' and ~. Substituting 
(202.10) and (202.11) into (202.5) 2 yields 
)! = p p Xe ('p- V) (p- V) ·da +V· f da p Xe (p- V) + l 
9: 9: c c (202 12) + !f3x V- pdapx (t(n; +Pn). · 9'c 
Therefore if we strengthen (202.9) to read 
p-V=o(p-3), e=0(1), t<n>+Pn=a(p- 3), 
we conclude not only the Euler-D'Alembert paradox but also1 
(202.13) 
)! = !f300 X V, (202.14) 
where !f3oo is the relative tnomentum 2 of the material exterior to the obstacle. Under 
the severe conditions (202.13), then, a stationary rigid body will generally exert a 
torque perpendicular to the direction of motion. In certain cases of symmetry 
we shall have lf300 = 0; the body then exerts no torque. 
CISOTTI 3 extended these results to the case of an obstacle spinning at angular 
velocity w, provided the motionrelative to the obstacle be steady. He found that 
then 
(202.15) 
the expression for )! is more complicated. 
All our results are expressed in terms of the reaction of the obstacle on the material. That this is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the reaction 
of the material on the obstacle is to be expected and follows from CAUCHY's 
lemma, to be proved in the next section. 
203. The stress tensor 4• The field of stress vectors t(n) is not an ordinary 
vector field. Rather, since the stress vectors across two different surfaces through 
Fig. 35. CAUCHY's construction to prove bis fundamental theorem. 
the same point are generally 
different, at any given time 
t(n) is a function both of the 
position vector p and of the 
direction n. The first problern is to delimit the dass of 
t(n) forfixed p as n varies. 
We apply (200.1) to a 
tetrahedron (Fig. 3 5), three 
.Xz sides of which are mutually 
orthogonal, the fourth having outward unit normal n. 
Let the altitude of the tetrahedron be h; the area of the inclined face, s; the 
projections of n onto the orthogonal faces, n1, n2, and n3, so that the areas of 
the inclined faces are snl, sn2, and sn3. Assurne that the fields eP and e/ are 
1 CISOTTI [1910, 4], BoGGIO [1910, 2]. 2 I.e., $ 00 =o f(p- V) d'.m, where by (202.13)1 the integral, taken over the infinite space 
exterior to the obstacle, is convergent. 3 [1910, 4]; a vectorial derivationwas given by BoGGIO [1910, 2]. 4 The idea and the results here are due to CAUCHY [1823, 1] [1827, 1]. In a sense, the 
fundamental theorem (203.4) is contained in a memoir written by FRESNEL in 1822 but not 
published until much later [1868, 7, §§ 3-4]; however, FRESNEL did not disentangle stress 
in general from purely elastic stress. Cf. also HoPKINS [1847, 1, § 2]. 
Sect. 203. The stress tensor. 543 
bounded, that t(n) is a continuous function both of p and of n. We may then 
estimate the volume integrals in {200.1) and apply the theorem of mean value 
to the surface integral: 
{203 .1) 
where K is a bound and where t(n) and t~ are the stress vectors at certain points 
upon the outsides of the respective faces. We cancel 5 and let h tend to zero, 
so obtaining 
(203.2) 
where all stress vectors are evaluated at the vertex of the tetrahedron. From 
their definitions, the quantities t 1 , t 2 , t 3 do not depend upon n. 
In the case when n,.=1, n 2 =n3 =0, we have t 1 =t(-n)• since the outward 
normal to the face 1 is -n. Although the construction of the tetrahedron fails 
for this case, we may nevertheless suppose nc~1, ~0, ~0, and by the 
assumed continuity of t(n) as a function of n infer from {203.2) that 
{203.3) 
This is Cauchy's lemma: The stress vectors acting upon opposite sides of the same 
surface at a given point are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. 
Now select a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system whose planes are the 
three orthogonal faces. With the convention that tkm is the k-th component of 
the stress vector acting upon the positive side of the plane zm = const, by {203. 3) 
we infer that -t1 x=l:.x, -t1 y=tyx• -t1 z=tzx, etc., and hence (203.2) becomes 
t(n)k =tkmnm, where the quantities tkm are independent of n. By the quotient 
law of tensorsl, the quantities tk m form a Cartesian tensor of second order. The 
tensor equation 
tk - tkmn (n)- m> {203.4) 
having been established in a special co-ordinate system, is valid in all co-ordinate 
systems. This proves Cauchy's fundamental theorem: From the stress vectors 
acting across three mutually perpendicular planes at a point, all stress vectors at 
that point are determinate; they are given by {203.4) as linear functions of the stress 
tensor tkm. 
Application of a parallel argument to (200.3) yields m<nl = -m(-n)• m~n) = 
mkqnq; in terms of the equivalent skew-symmetric tensor m7J,, we have 
kq kqp m(n)=m np, {203.5) 
In the foregoing analysis, the point under consideration was an interior point. 
However, the argument may easily be adjusted to the case of a boundary point 
where the bounding surface has a continuous tangent plane. Thus if a body is 
subject to loading upon its surface d, the corresponding boundary condition is 
tk = tkmn = sk mkr - mkrp n - qkr (n) m ' (n) - p - ' {203 .6) 
where s and q are prescribed functions of position upon d. Moreover, if d is a 
surface of discontinuity separating two regions in which t(n) and m<nl are continuous, the argument may be applied separately on each side, again yielding 
{203.4) and {203.5), though the components tkm and mkPq will fail to be continuous across d. Thus CAUCHY's fundamental theorem holds in all cases of interest. 
1 At this point CAUCHY [1829, 1] made a fresh appeal to (200.1). 
544 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 204. 
204 .. Further properties of the stress tensor. The physical components of stress, 
t(km) are regularly written1 as k~. We have 
dim k~ = [M L -1 r-2]. (204.1) 
The quantity k~ is the k component of tension per unit area acting upon the 
side of the surface xm = const which faces in the direction of increasing xm. The 
normal components kk are called normal stresses; the shear components k~, 
k=F m, are called shearing stresses 2• These terms are consistent with those introduced in Sect. 200, but not identical with them. 
By (203.4) and the definition given in Sect. 200, the stress is hydrostatic 
if and only if for all n we have tk m nm =-pnk, where p is a scalarindependent 
of n. First we relinquish this last condition and allow p possibly to depend upon 
n. Then we must ha ve (tk m + p r5~) nm = 0 for all unit vectors n. Choosing 
n = ( 1, 0, 0), we conclude that t\ + p 1, ( 0, 0) M = 0, etc., so that in a certain 
reetangular Cartesian CO-ordinate system, II tk mll is diagonal. Therefore II tk ",II is 
diagonal in all co-ordinate systems; i.e., t is spherical. Rephrasing these remarks, 
we obtain a theorem of CAUCHY3 : The stress is hydrostatic if and only if every 
element is free of shearing stress; in this case 
(204.2) 
where p is a scalar independent of n. For any stress tensor which is symmetric, 
it is of course possible to find at each point three particular surface elements 
free of shearing stress, this being but a restatement of the diagonalization theorem 
in Sect. App. 37. 
In hydrostatic stress, all stress vectors at a point have the same magnitude, but the 
converse does not hold. For if all stress vectors have equal magnitude, then gkq tkm tqP non np 
is independent of n, subject to the condition gkq nk nq = 1. Introducing a multiplier M 
and setting equal to zero the coefficients of the resulting quadratic form which must vanish 
identically, we get 
tqm tqp = M r5';. (204.3) 
Eliminating M by taking the trace of this equation, we obffiin 
tqk tqm = J" t5 P tsp r5':,., (204.4) 
a homogeneaus quadratic condition to be satisfied by t as necessary and sufficient that all 
stress vectors have the same magnitude. It asserts that the product of t by its transpose 
shall be a spherical tensor. 
However, for the normal stresses on all elements to be equal, tkmnmnk must 
be independent of n for all units vectors n, and this Ieads at once to (204.2). 
That is, the stress is hydrostatic .if and only if all elements sulter equal normal 
stress. Also, the stress is hydrostatic if and only if every stress component tk"' 
transforms as a scalar 4• 
Instead of the stress tensor t, sometimes the pressure tensor, defined by 
p=-t, (204.5) 
is employed. Also, if p is any scalar whatever, a corresponding extra stress may 
defined by 
(204.6) 
1 PEARSON [1886, 4, § 610). 2 The first special studies of shearing stresses were made by CouLOMB [ 1776, 1, § V] and 
by HoPKINS [1847. 1, §§ 4-5]. 3 [1827, 1]. 
' ProLA [1848, 2, ~ 62]. 
Sect. 205. CAUCHY's laws of motion. 545 
The mean pressure is the scalar defined by 
p ==--! tkk = -!- It. (204.7) 
In the case when p =p, the tensor v is the stress deviator 1 , v = 0t. The decomposition (204.6) is then maximal in the sense of Sect. App. 43. 
When there exist three perpendicular elements subject to pure shearing stress 
(Sect. 200), the stress is described as a state of pure shearing stress. By the results 
at the beginning of this section, for a state of pure shearing stress it is necessary 
and sufficient that in some reetangular Cartesian Co-ordinate system t assume 
the form (App. 44.3) with a =0. Thus a necessary and sufficient condition for a state 
of pure shear is that the mean pressure vanish: p = 0. Therefore the maximal 
decomposition t =-p 1 +ot splits an arbitrary state of stress uniquely into a 
hydrostatic pressure and a state of pure shearing stress. Further results concerning pure shearing stress will be given in Sect. 209. 
When t is a plane tensor, the state of stress is said to be plane. In plane 
stress, a family of parallel planes is free of traction. 
205. Cauchy's laws of motion. If in (200.1) and (200. 3) we replace t(n) and 
m(n) by their expressions (203.4) and (203.5h. we obtain 
These equations are of the form (157.1) and hence are equations of balance. The 
tensor -t is the influx of momentum per unit mass (i.e., velocity), the vector I 
is the supply of momentum, etc. 
By applying (157.6) to (205.1) 1 we conclude that in regions where t is continuously differentiable and (!X and el are continuous, a necessary and sufficient 
condition for the balance of linear momentum, expressed in general co-ordinates, is 
(205 .2) 
This is Cauchy's lirst law ol motion2. 
Similarly, by application of (193.3) to (205.1) 1 we conclude that at a surface 
across which t, (!, and ~ may be discontinuous, but in whose vicinity these quantities and o~fot and (!I remain bounded, we have 3 
(205.3) 
1 KLEITZ [1873, 4, § 23]. 
2 [1827, 4] [1828, 2, Eq. (25)], the special case when t is spherical being due to EDLER 
[1757, 2, § 21]. That (205.2) is sufficient as well as necessary for the balance of momentum 
was proved by PorssoN [1829, 5, §I,~ 11] and KELVIN and TAIT [1867, 3, § 698]. The Cartesian tensorial invariance of (205.2) was verified by PIOLA [1848, 2, ~~55, 58]. The derivation 
given above (i.e., in Sect. 157) is due to KIRCHHOFF [1876, 2, Vor!. 11, § 2]; cf. also DoNATI 
[1888, 4, pp. 347-349], LovE [1892, 8, § 14]. 
3 For the case when t is spherical, hydrodynamical special cases were obtained by STOKES 
[1848, 4, Eq. (3)], RIEMANN [1860, 4, § 5], RANKINE [1870, 6, §§ 3- 5], CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 2, 
§ 1], HuGONIOT [1887, 1, § 140] and JouGUET [1901, 9]; for general t but linearized acceleration, by CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 3, § 4, Eq. (.5)]; the special case for finite elastic deformation, 
by ZEMPLEN [1905, 7, p. 448] [1905, 9, § 3], who approached it via HAMILTON's principle in 
the form given in Sect. 236A; the generat result is due to KoTCHINE [1926, 3, Eq. (18)]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 3 5 
546 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 205. 
where U is the local speed of propagation of the singular surface. By ( 189.14) 
and (183.4) we have the equivalent forms 
[t(n)l +e±U±[:.i:] =0, l,m[tkm] -e±i±[_ik] =0, (205.4) 
where f = 0 is an equation of the surface of discontinuity, and where either the + 
mark or the - mark is to be used throughout. When U =0 or [:E] =0, these 
formulae reduce to 
(205.5) 
Across a surface of discontinuity which is not a shock, the stress vector is continuous 1• 
Resolving (205.3) into components normal and tangential to the singular 
surface yields 
(205 .6) 
where (185.6) has been used. At a point where t is hydrostatic, from (205.6) 2 
we have e± U±[xt] = 0, showing that either the tangential velocity is continuous, 
or the singular surface is material, or both. From (189.15) and (205.6)1 we obtain 2 
(U-)2=_gt__[tnnl. or u+u-=_[tnnJ. (205.7) (F [e] ' [e] 
Thus the speeds of propagation of a shock wave are determined by the jump of the 
normal tension and by the values of the density on each side of the shock, independently 
of all thermodynamic principles or constitutive equations. This result shows also 
that at a condensation shock, the normal pressure increases. 
Second, we apply (157.6) to (205.1) 2, obtaining 
Hence e z[kZp] = (mkpq + Z[ktp]q) ,q + e (lkp + Z[k /pJ). 
mkpq,q- t[kpj + e lkp + z[k (tp]q,q + e /p]- ezp]) = 0. 
(205.8) 
(205 .9) 
By CAUCHY's first law (205.2), the term in parentheses vanishes. The resulting 
formula, put into general co-ordinates, is 3 
mkPq,q+ elkP = tlkPl. (205.10) 
In the non-polar case, this becomes tlkPl=O, expressing Cauchy's second law 
of motion4 : When there are no assigned couples and no couple-stresses, a necessary 
and sulficient condition for the balance of moment of momentum in a body where 
linear momentum is balanced is 5 
(205.11) 
i.e., the stress tensor is symmetric. 
1 Announced by PorssoN [1829, 5, §I,~ 10] [1831, 2, § 25], proved by CAUCHY [1843, 1] 
and HAUGHTON [1849, 1, p. 176] [ 1855. 2, §I]. Note that (205.5) holds at all vortex sheets 
(Sects. 185, 186). 
2 KoTCHINE [1926, 3, Eq. (20)], the one-dimensional hydrostatic case being a celebrated 
resu!t of RANKINE [1870, 6, Eq. (6)] and HUGONIOT [1887, 2, §§ 144, 149]. 3 For references, see footnotes 1 and 2, p. 538. GRAD [1952, 7, § 4], motivated by a 
model in which the molecules have internal degrees of freedom, adds to the ordinary moment 
of momentum Z[kZm] an internal moment of momentum.ukm• resulting in the additional term 
!!iJ-kP on the left-hand side of (205.10). Cf. also ERICKSEN [1960, 1, § 2]. 4 [1827, 1, Th. II]. This law had been discovered but not published by FRESNEL in 
1822 [1868, 7, § 5]. That (205.11) and (205.2) imply (200.2) was proved by PoisSoN [1829, 5, 
§I,~ 12]. The observation that the classical form (205.11) involves simplifying hypotheses 
and is not a general statement of balance of moment of momentum was made by HAUGHTON 
[1855. 2, p. 107]. The German Iiterature persists in attributing credit to BoLTZMANN here. 5 Inspection of (205.10) shows clearly conditions under which the stress tensor is symmetric 
and conditions under which it is not. We do not cite the recent Iiterature propagating misunderstandings on this classical subject. 
Sect. 205. CAUCHY's laws of motion. 547 
Let n and n' be two unit vectors at a given point. By (203.4) and (205.11) 
we have 
(205.12) 
and conversely, if we have (203.4), then (205.11) is the special case of (205.12) 
when n and n' are perpendicular. This is Cauchy's reciprocal theorem1 : In 
the second law, the symmetry of the stress tensor is equivalent to the condition that 
each of two stress vectors at a point has an equal proiection upon the normal to the 
surface on which the other acts (Fig. 36). Extensionofthis result to the case when 
(205.10) rather than (205.11) holds is easy and uninteresting. 
By application of (193.3) to (205.1) 2 we get the following condition at a surface across which m, t, (!, andx may be discontinuous, but 8zj8t, j, and l remain 
bounded: 
nq[mkpq] +z[k([~p]qnq + } 
+ (! U Zp]]) = 0. (205.13) 
By (205.3), the term in parentheses 
vanishes, and (205.13), put into general 
coordinates, becomes 
the couple-stress vector is continuous. 
If m = 0, this condition is satisfied 
automatically: When there is no couplestress, balance of linear momentum at a Fig. 36. CAUCHY's reciprocal theorem. 
surface of discontinuity implies balance of moment of momentum as well. In par· 
ticular, this holds for the non-polar case. 
The stress vector t(n) is not uniquely defined 2 by the requirement given here. 
being indeterminate to within an arbitrary vector function of place and direction 
such that its vector sum and vector moment over any closed surface vanishes, 
By (205.2), (205.5), and (205.11), the corresponding stress tensor Of must satisfy 
(205.15) 
Such a stress tensorweshall call a null stress. Any dynamically correct statement 
regarding the stress of an arbitrary continuum must remain invariant when an 
arbitrary null stress is added to the stress tensor. All results derived in the 
foregoing paragraphs satisfy this principle of invariance: Any motion dynamically 
possible subiect to a stress tensor t is also possible subiect to t +0 t, where 0t is an 
arbitrary null stress 3• 
Eqs. (205.2) and (205.11) [or (205.10)] in regions of sufficient smoothness and 
Eq. (205.3) [supplemented, if necessary, by (205.14)] at a surface of discontinuity are the fundamental equations oj continuum mechanics. 
In the general case, by (205.2) and (205.10) we have 
(205.16) 
1 [1829. 2]. 
2 PorNCARE [1892, 11, § 38]. PorNCARE objected also that the existence of a field of 
stress vectors is not self-evident, but such an objection could be raised almost anywhere in 
theoretical physics. 
a This statement refers only to general continua; if t satisfies the equations of some 
particular theory of materials, then t + 0t generally fails to be a solution. 
35* 
548 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 205A. 
or 
{205.17) 
This equation, which shows that the symmetric part of the stress tensor obeys an equation 
of the same form as CAUCHY's first law but with suitably supplemented forces, may be taken 
along with (205.10) as one of the two fundamental equations of motion. 
A more general scheme of mechanics might be set up in terms of the moments 
(166.7)1 , with basic equations as follows: 
Ok '1: 1 ... knq-- 9'R k1 ... knq> ) 
,h J (205.18) = 'j'tk1 ... knqda + fk 1 ... /nqdiJJl. 
f/' j/' 
The corresponding boundary conditions and differential equations are, respectively, 
tk .... knq= tk .... knqPnP, } (205.19) 
(! Zk 1 ... kn Zq = tk1 ... kn q p, p +e /k" ... kn q · 
They may be recast by writing tk .... k.q as the sum of the n-th moments of all 
stresses of lower order plus a tensor of excess; e.g., in the notation introduced 
above, 
(205.20) 
The assigned moments fk .... knq are subject to a law of transformation such as 
to render {205.20) invariant with respect to change of the origin of Co-ordinates. 
205A. Appendix. Notations for stress. The following table, shortened from that of 
PEARSON [1886, 4, § 610], presents the notations for stress found in the classical works and 
in some cases still in use today. The blocks stand for the matrix of tkm in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, or possibly for physical components in curvilinear Co-ordinates. 
CAUCHY's earlier work 
A F E 
F B D 
E D c 
F. NEUMANN, 
KIRCHHOFF, 
RIEMANN 
Xx Xy xz 
Yx Yy Yz 
Zx Zy Zz 
PoisSON 
Pa Qa Ra 
~ Q2 R2 
~ Ql R1 
KELVIN 
p V T 
V Q s 
T s R 
CoRIOLIS, 
CAUCHY's later work, 
ST.-VENANT, 
MAXWELL 
Pxx Pxy Pxz 
Pyx Pyy Pyz 
P.x Pzy Pzz 
CLEBSCH 
tll 112 113 
121 122 123 
131 Ia 2 l33 
~ Ta I; 
Ta ~ :z;_ 
I; :z;_ Na 
PEARSON 
XX .iY fi 
jiX yy yz 
Zi iY Zi 
German engineering works usually employ ~. N,;, or r1x for lxx and :fxy, :Z:,, l'xy• or Tz for 
txy• etc. French authors usually follow LAME, though some adopt the more luminous notation 
of CoRIOLIS. The definitions sometimes differ in sign. The notation lkm may be remernbered 
by the word tension; Pkm• defined by (204.5), by the word pressure. 
In this work we always use PEARSON's notation k;n, already introduced in Sect. 204, 
when employing physical components in orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinates. By (App. 14.6} 
and (App. 14.7), CAUCHY's first law (205.2) then assumes the explicit form 
ex<k> = ef<k> + ± {-v1 a!m (liiJ;;n). + m~l g V gmm 
+-·-------·----- ~ 1 ayg,;;. mm 1 ayg;;.~} 
Vfkl. yg:~ oxm Vgmm yg,.-,; oxk I {205A.1) 
Sects. 206,207. The equivalence of stress, extrinsic Ioads, and transfer of momentum. 549 
(LAME [1841, 4, §§VII-VIII] [1859. 3, § 14, Eqs. (14) (15)]; cf. MoRERA [1885, 6], ANDRUETTO [1931, 1]; for generat curvilinear Co-ordinates, cf. Rrccr and LEvr-CrvrTA [1901, 14, 
Chap. 6, § 3]. ToNOLO [1930, 7]). 
206. Stress impulse. For the laws of impulse in continuum mechanics, we 
apply to ( 198.1) the general results given in Sect. 194. The influx of im pulse 
is the negative of the stress-impulse tensor i; the supply of im pulse is a vector s; 
and as the counterpart of CAUCHY's first law (205.2) we get from (194.11) 
(206.1) 
while the balance of moment of momentum assumes exactly the form (205.10) 
with i replacing t and with appropriate new symbols replacing m and l. 
In the special case when i is spherical and s = 0, the covariant form of 
{206.1) is 
(206.2) 
Hence follows trivially a celebrated theorem of LAGRANGE and CAUCHY1 : The 
mass flow produced by impulsive hydrostatic pressure is lamellar; in particular, a 
homochoric motion initiated by impulsive hydrostatic pressure is irrotational in the 
first instant. 
More generally, by comparing (205.2) and (206.1) we derive the following 
analogy: The correspondences 
(206.3) 
at a given instant enable us to construct a dynamically possible impulse, Stressimpulse, and supply of impulse from a dynamically possible acceleration, stress, 
and force, and conversely. 
207. The equivalence of stress, extrinsic loa:!s, and transfer of momentum. 
As follows from the remarks in Sects. 15 7 and 199, in any given problern the 
stress may be replaced by equipollent extrinsic forces, or the extrinsic and mutual 
forces by a stress. Indeed, CAUCHY's first law (205 .2) asserts that the resultant 
force exerted by the stress is tkm m per unit volume, while (205.10) asserts that the 
stress and the couple-stress exe~t a resultant couple of magnitude mkPq,q_tlkPl per 
unit volume. 
Conversely, to replace mutual and extrinsic loads by stresses we must 
integrate tkm,m=efk with jk given. Any solution of this equation may be added 
to the stresst in (205.2), resulting in a combined stress under which the material 
moves as if subject to no extrinsic or mutual force. In general, to calculate an 
equivalent stress is elaborate, but it turns out to be simple in the special case 
when ef is lamellar: 
For then 
(207.1) 
(207.2) 
so that when the assigned force per unit volume is lamellar, it is equipollent to an 
appropriate hydrostatic pressure 2• 
This equivalence of various loads is generally artificial and useless, however. 
The course of the discipline of mechanics is to prescribe functional dependences 
for fand t (cf. Sect. 7). With a single prescription fort, a host of different motions 
1 The statement and proof of LAGRANGE [1783, 1, § 20], motivated perhaps by earlier 
remarks of D'ALEMBERT [1752, 1, §§SO- 51], were corrected by CAUCHY [1827, 5, Part 2, 
Sect. 1, §§ 4- 5]. 
2 In effect, this observation is due to EULER [1757. 1, §§ 25-31]. 
550 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 207. 
of the body, corresponding to different initial and boundary conditions, are 
possible; for each of these different motions, a different equivalent f will result. 
There is a simple and natural equivalence of stress to transfer of momentum, 
obtained1 by substituting (156.7) into CAUCHY's first law (205.2): 
:t (e .i") = (t""'- e .i" x"') ,". + e I". (207.3) 
This equation asserts that if the tensor - e .i" .im is added to t""', the true rate 
of change of momentum may be replaced by the local apparent rate 8(e~)f8t; 
therefore - e~ ~ is called the tensor of apparent stress due to trans/er of momentum 2• 
I t is the negative of the momentum transfer, which we have discussed in Sect. 170. 
Very little is known regarding the transformation of systems of stresses appropriate 
to one problern into those appropriate to another. An elegant result of this kind is due to 
ÜLDROYD and THOMAsa and NoLL 4 • We present NoLL's form of the argument. For an incompressible medium, we consider two velocity fields d:1 and re, which differ only by a rigid rotation at constant angular velocity w (cf. Sect. 143). We assume further that, apart from 
arbitrary hydrostatic pressures p1 1 and p2 1, the stress tensors in the two motions are the 
same functions of place and time 5 : 
p11 + tl = p,1 + t,. (207.4) 
Let the frame in which the velocity is d:1 be inertial, so that CAUCHY's first law (205.2) is 
satisfied. By the results in Sect. 197. the second motion, if it is tobe dynamically possible, 
must then satisfy an equation of the same form but including the apparent forces arising 
from the rotation with respect to an inertial frame. Thus we have 
(! fi1 = div t1 + (! f, } (207.5) 
(! fi1 = div t2 + (! (f + g), 
where - g is the sum of the CoRIOLIS and centrifugal accelerations. Subtracting (207.5) 1 
from (207.5) 2 and using (207.4), we see that 
(! g = grad (P2 - P1 ). (207.6) 
In order that the motion d:2 be dynamically possible, it is thus necessary and sufficient 
that g possess a single-valued potential. From the results in Sect. 143, a sufficient condition 
for g to be lamellar is that the motion be plane and that w be normal to the plane of motion 6 • 
Conditions sufficient to ensure single-valuedness of the function Q' in (143.10) have been 
stated in Sect. 161. Directly from (207.6) we see that the reaction per unit height exerted 
upon any cylinder perpendicular to the plane of motion and of cross-sectional area ~ differs, 
in the two cases, only by the reaction of a hydrostatic pressure equalling the potential of 
the centrifugal and CoRIOLIS accelerations. The moment is thus zero, and the resultant 
force is easily shown to be that requisite to impel a mass-point of mass (! ~ located at the 
centroid to move with the velocity of the centroid. Alternatively, the difference of the forces 
is that which would be exerted upon the region occupied by the cylinder if it were filled with 
the surrounding material. Hence if a rigid homogeneaus cylinder immersed in an incompressible substance of the same density as the cylinder is made to undertake any motion in a plane 
normal to its generators, then a uniform rotation of the whole system about any axis parallel 
to the generators will not alter the motion of the cylinder relative to the surrounding substance. 
This interesting discovery of G. I. TAYLOR, in the special case of a fluid, has been verified 
by experiments. 
1 Given for the hydrostatic case by GREENHILL [1875. 2, § 22], for the general case by 
MATTIOLI [1914, 7, § 2]. 
2 While equations of the form (207.3) in the case when t is hydrostatic were given by 
earlier writers, the tensor (!d: re is often named after REYNOLDS; it was discussed by LORENTZ 
[1907, 5, § 11]. 3 [1956. 16]. 4 [1957. 12]. 5 There is reason to believe that all material constitutive equations for incompressible 
media must satisfy this requirement; cf. NoLL [1955, 18, §§ 4, 10]. 
8 This result, for a perfect fluid, and also the result below for the force exerted upon an 
immersed cylinder, are due to TAYLOR [1916, 6, pp. 100-104]. Casesofintermediate generality 
are treated by DEAN [1954, 4] and }AIN [1955, 15]. 
Sect. 208. Principal stresses and stress invariants. 551 
208. Principal stresses and stress invariants. In the non-polar case, CAUCHY's 
secondlaw (205.11} asserts thattissymmetric. Bythe firsttheorem in Sect. App. 37, 
it has real proper numbers, called the principal stresses 1, and real orthogonal 
principal directions, which define the principal axes of stress. Elements normal 
to the principal axes of stress are free of shearing stress, being subject to normal 
tension or pressure according to the sign of the corresponding principal stress; 
these are extremal values of the normal stresses. The scalar invariants of stress, 
It, Ilt, Illt, are symmetric functions of the principal stresses. 
When t2=t3=0, t 1=f=O, the state of stress is called simple tension, and the 
principal direction corresponding to t1 is called the axis of the tension. In the 
engineering literature, when one and only one principal stress vanishes, the 
state of stress is often called bi-axial; similarly, if no principal stress vanishes, 
the state of stress is tri-axial. 
A state of non-vanishing plane symmetric pure shearing stress (Sect. 200) 
is called simple shearing stress; in a suitable reetangular Cartesian system 
0 txy 0 
lltkmJI= 0 0 , txy=f=O; (208.1) 
0 
an invariant condition is 
(208.2) 
so that txy = t 1 = - t2 =V-Ilt, and the principal axes of stress lying in the 
plane of stress bisect the angle between the elements suffering pure shearing 
stress. 
In the non-polar case, the condition (204.4) that all stress vectors have equal magnitude 
reduces to (t1 ) 2= (t2) 2= (t3) 2, as is obvious. 
An exhaustive study of the general state of stress at a point was made by 
KLEITZ2• Some of his results, as weil as the fundamental theorem of CouLOMB 
and HoPKINS on the maximum shearing stress, have been given in more general 
form in Sect. App. 46. In particular, (App. 46.14} shows that the magnitude of the 
maximum shearing stress for a pair of directions, one of which is kept fixed as 
the other swings perpendicularly about it, is a function only of the differences 
of the principal stresses, and hence is independent of the mean pressure. For 
the overall maximum and minimum shears, this independence holds a fortiori. 
From results of BoussrNESQ3 given in more general form in Sect. 23 it follows that among 
the planes through the principal axis corresponding to the principal stress t2 when t1 ;;; t2 ;;; t3 
occur 
1. The planes across which the magnitude of the stress vector is greatest and least; 
2. The planes across which the magnitude of the normal stress is greatest and least; 
3. The planes on which the magnitude of the shearing stress is greatest; 
4. The planes across which the angle subtended by the stress vector is greatest and least. 
Since theorems of this kind are no more than verbal adjustments of theorems 
on an arbitrary symmetric matrix, for economy we refer the reader to Sects. App. 3 7 
-App. 50. Perhaps the most important function of the present section is to give 
warning that these results follow only from the assumption that there are no 
extrinsic or mutual couples or couple stresses. 
1 The theory is due to FRESNEL (1821-1822) [1868, 5, § 28] [1868, 6, §§ 1, 8-9] [1868, 
7, § 1]. 
2 [1872, 2, § 6] [1873, 4, Chap. II]. 3 [1877. 1. § 2]. 
552 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 209. 
209. Geometrical representations of stress. Geometrical representations for 
the stress tensor and stress vector may be read off from the results of Sects. 21 
to 24. For the non-polar case, the following quadrics were introduced by CAUCHY 
and by LAME and CLAPEYRON 1 : 
1. The quadric oft, called Cauchy's stress quadric. The normal stress across 
any plane through its center is inversely proportional to the squared length of 
that radius vector of the quadric which is normal to the plane. 
2. The quadric of t-1, called Lame's stress director quadric. The radius vector 
from the center to any point of the surface is in the direction of the stress vector 
across a plane parallel to the tangent plane at the point. 
J. The quadric of t 2, called Cauchy's stress ellipsoid. The central radius vector 
in any direction is inversely proportional to the magnitude of the stress vector 
across the plane at right angles to that direction. 
4. The quadric of t- 2, called Lame's stress ellipsoid. The magnitude of the 
stress vector across any plane is proportional to the central perpendicular on 
the parallel tangent plane of the ellipsoid. 
The asymptotic cone of LAM:E's stress director quadric, called Lame's cone 
of shearing stress, is the locus of elements subject to pure shearing stress. When 
it is real, it separates the planes across which the normal traction is a tension 
from those across which it is a pressure. When the cone is imaginary, the normal 
traction across allplanes is a tension or a pressure according as lt>O or lt<O. 
For there to be a state of pure shearing stress (Sect. 204), it is necessary and 
sufficient that this cone be rectangular. There are then infinitely many orthogonal triples of elements subject to pure shearing stress. 
Further analysis of the stress quadrics and of curves upon them has been given by PACELLA2. 
The circle diagrams of MoHR (Sect. 24) originated in connection with stress 
and are frequently used by engineers. 
In the non-polar case, t has three mutually orthogonal families of real principal trajectories (Sect. App. 47), called the stress trajectories 3. The problern of isostatic surfaces 
(Sect. App. 48) arose in connection with stress. When an isostatic surface exists for the 
stress tensor, it is a surface free of shearing stress. If there are three families of isostatic 
surfaces, they may be used as an orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinate system; when referred 
to these co-ordinates, by (App. 47.4) CAUCHY's first law (205A.1) reduces to the form 4 
., 1 otk tk- Im tk- tq ex<k>= ef<k> + ---=c- -k + -----. 
vgkk ox r!kq (!km 
(209.1) 
where the three indices k, m, q are unequal, and where the (!km are the principal radii of 
curvature of the surface xk = const. While these equations have limited correctness in three 
dimensions, their specialization to plane stress is always valid and often useful. In view 
of the results in Sect. 208, in the case when x = 0 and f = 0 these formulae express the 
rate of variation of a given principal stress along its trajectory in terms of two principal 
shearing stresses. Further results concerning the lines and sheets associated with the stress 
field may be read off from the analysis in Sects. App. 47 to App. SO. 
1 See Sect. 21 for references. In 1821-1822 FRESNEL [1868, 5, § 28] [1868, 6, §§ 1-7] 
[1868, 7, §§ 1-4] constructed but did not publish a theory of elasticity based on postulating 
the ellipsoidal distribution of stress and the coincidence of the principal axes of stress and 
of infinitesimal strain. 
For plane stress, a method of representing both the magnitude and the direction of the 
principal stress fields on a single diagram was constructed by TESAR [1933, 11]. 
2 [1948, 19]. 3 While the existence of these trajectories is weil known, we have been unable to trace 
their history or to find Iiterature concerning them except in very special cases. 4 LAME [1841, 4, §XI] [1859. 3, § 149]. Cf. also WARREN [1864, 5], MoRERA [1885, 6, § 3]. 
Sect. 210. The equations of motion expressed in terms of a reference state. 553 
Other trajectories can be associated with a state of stress. Rather arbitrarily, VaLTERRA 1 
chose to consider the trajectories of the field of stress vectors across the elements normal 
to x. These trajectories, which he called lines of tension, are indeterminate for static problems. 
210. The equations of motion expressed in terms of a reference state. We 
now give forms of CAUCHY's laws in which the independent positional variable 
is not the place ;I! where the stress is experienced but rather is a reference point X 
functionally related to ;I! through (66.1) [or (16.2)]. The apparatus of Subchapter BI is at our disposal. Thus far we have considered tkm as a function of ;I! 
and t only; for such a tensor field, the definition (App. 20.2) yields tkm,m=tkm;m· 
In this section we prefer to consider t as a double tensor field. CAUCHY's laws 
(205.2) and (205.11) then assume the forms 
(210.1) 
Since tkm;m=tkm;MX~m• by substituting (17.8) into (210.1h we obtain 2 
(!xk=tkm;Mofloxm;M+efk, (210.2) 
where e == (! ]. When the differentiations are carried out, the first term Oll the 
right becomes a sum of three J acobians 3 : 
TkK = ]tkmXfm, 
From (203.4) 2 and (20.8) we have 
tfnl da= TkK dAK. 
(210.3) 
(210.4) 
(210.5) 
Hence II TkK II gives the stress at ;I! measured per unit area at X; the quantity 
TkK is the component along the XK co-ordinate of the component of the stress 
vector along the xk Co-ordinate, multiplied by the ratio of the area at ;I! to the 
area at X. Thus the quantities TkK, sometimes called pseudo-stresses, are awkward 
to interpret. Moreover, in terms of TkK CAUCHY's second law (210.1) 2 assumes 
the elaborate form 5 
(210.6) 
By (210.4) 1 and (18.2) we have 
TkK;K = (] Xfm);K tkm + J X~mtkm;K' } 
=Jtkm;m• (210.7) 
1 [1899, 4]. VaLTERRA calculated the flux of mechanical energy across vector tubes of 
this field. 
2 BouSSINESQ [1872, 1, §I, Eq. (3)]. The result may be read off from a transformation 
given by CLEBSCH [1857. 1, § 2]. Cf. E. and F. CossERAT [1896, 1, § 17]. 3 Due essentially to E. and F. CossERAT [1896, 1, § 43, Eq. (117)]; cf. TRUESDELL [1952, 
21, § 26]. The result in the hydrostatic case was given by EuLER [1770, 1, § 119]. 
4 [1833. 3, Eq. (42)] [1836, 1, Eq. (73)] [1848, 2, ~m 34-38]. Cf. also KIRCHHOFF [1852, 
1, pp.763-764], C.NEUMANN [1860, 3, §§2, 4-5]. E. and F.CossERAT [1896, 1, §15, 
Eq. (33)]. KIRCHHOFF remarked that the matrix IITkKII is not generally symmetric, as indeed 
is manifest from the present notation. Although PoiNCARE [1892, 11, § 40] gave a clear 
explanation of this fact, based upon (210.5) and the observation that three orthogonal 
elements daa at :r do not in generat arise from three orthogonal elements dAa at X by (20.8), 
nevertheless his elaborate, confusing, and unnecessarily restricted manner of stating [ 1892, 
10, § 35] that for infinitesimal displacement gradients the matrix II TkKII is approximately 
symmetric gave rise to an unnecessary discussion of this "paradox" and an incorrect notion 
that it is connected with the presence of initial stress (E. and F. CossERAT [1896, 1, § 26], 
COLLINET [1924, 3], }OUGUET [1924, 6]). 
• The corresponding form of the more general law (205.10) is obtained by E. and F. 
CossERAT [1909. 5, §53]. 
554 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 211. 
Substituting into (210.1h yields an expression1 for CAUCHY's first law in terms 
of T"K: 
!!x" = PK;K +et". 
PIOLA 2 introduced also the tensor TK M defined by 
TKM == xK;k T"M = J X5,Xf'!,tkm, 
In terms of it, CAUCHY's laws (210.1h 2 assume the forms 3 
-""-( k TKM) +-!" TKM=TMK. (!X - X;K ;M (! ' 
(210.8) 
(210.9) 
(210.10) 
While the expression of the first law is simple in terms of T"K, the second 
law is complicated; for TK M, the reverse holds. There is no simple and exact 
form 4 with X as independent variable. 
211. CAUCHY's laws in space-time; the stress-momentum tensor. The results 
of Sect. 205 express the balance of momentum and moment of momentum in an 
inertial frame. Apparent forces and torques on a body were calculated in Sect.197, 
but for the local equations in a frame which is not inertial it is easier to use the 
transformations (143.3) and (143.6). Since neither :il nor i: occurs in (205.10) 
or (205.14), we see that the equations for local balance of moment of momentum 
are valid for all observers. This follows only because, as emphasized in Sect. 205, 
linear momentum is assumed already in balance and the quantities m and l 
represent couples only, not torques combined with forces. In the condition 
(205.3) we find not:il buti:; however, from (143.3) follows [i:] =[i:'], and hence 
the condition for conservation of linear momentum at a surface of discontinuity, 
when written in terms of the velocity of propagation of the surface relative to the 
material, is valid for all observers. Thus among all the dynamicallaws, only the 
differential equation (205.2) for balance of linear momentum is affected by the 
apparent forces. 
To obtain a form of CAUCHY's first law valid in a rotating frame, we have 
only to replace :il by the expression on the right-hand side of (143.6). The result 
shows that in order to calculate the balance of linear momentum in an arbitrary 
frame, in addition to the metric tensor we must know the linear acceleration b 
and the angular velocity w of that frame with respect to an inertial frame. 
From the discussion of Sect. 197 it is clear that such dependence on the observer's 
motion relative to an inertial frame is unavoidable. 
1 PIOLA [1833, 3, Eqs. (22), (29)] [1836, 1, Eq. (56)] [1848, 2, ~ 36, Eq. (26)]. 
2 [1833, 3, Eq. (45)] [1836, 1, Eq. (132)]. Cf. also KIRCHHOFF [1852, 1, p. 767], E. and F. 
CossERAT [1896, 1, § 15, Eq. (31)]. L. BRILLOUIN [1928, 2, § 11] [1925, 2, § 7] [1938, 2, 
Chap. X, § X] and RIVAUD [1944, 10] have remarked that (210.9) is a statement that the 
quantities TK M and tk m are the components at X and at a: of a tensor density under the deformation (16.2). Since (210.9) is a mere definition, motivated only by the relative simplicity 
of some of the resulting forms of CAUCHv's laws, this observation does not seem to have 
mechanical significance. 
3 PIOLA [1833, 3, Eqs. (33), (35)]. Cf. also SrGNORINI [1930, 5, § 4] [1943, 6, Chap. Il, 
§ 4], TOLOTTI [1943, 7]. 
4 Other forms are given by SIGNORINI [1930, 5, § 5] [1930, 6, § 2], ZELMANOV [1948, 39, 
Eq. (4)], and CASTOLDI (1948, 5, § 7]. The form given by DEUKER (1941, 1, Eq. (8.7)] was 
shown tobe false by TRUESDELL (1952, 21, § 2612]. The forms given by PLATRIER (1948, 20, 
Eq. (13)] and GLEYZAL [1949, 12, Eq. (5)] also seem dubious. Various approximate forms 
of (210.10) or (210.8) occur in the literature; e.g., NovozHILov [1948, 18, §§ 21-22]. Explicit 
forms for (210.8) in orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinates are worked out by YosHIMURA 
[1953, 37]. 
Sect. 211. CAUCHY's laws in space-time; the stress-momentum tensor. 555 
However, it is possible to obtain a more elegant formalism1 for the balance 
of momentum by using the ideas and methods of Sect. 152. First we recall that 
the stress tensor t was introduced through use of the balance of linear momentum 
in an inertial frame; the contravariant components t"m occurring in (203.4) 
therefore are defined in all inertial co-ordinate systems. We now introduce the 
agreement that what we shall mean by the stress components t"m in any frame 
obtained from an inertial frame by a time-preserving transformation (154.8) is 
"'k' <> m' t"' m' = _u_x __ u_x- tP q 
- oxP oxq • (211.1) 
That is, in the terms used in Sect. 152, the components t"m may be regarded 
as the non-vanishing components of a space tensor tD.d having the canonical form 
(211.2) 
in any frame related to an inertial frame by a time-preserving transformation. 
The agreement (211.1) is consistent with the intuitive notion that assignable 
forces (including the stress vector 2) are invariant under the Euclidean group 
of transformations (152.1). The action of one part of the material upon another 
is thus assumed to be the same to all observers. 
From (211.2) it follows that the quantities T 04 defined by 
(211.3) 
where e is the mass density, taken as a world scalar, and where v is the world 
velocity (153.6), also constitute an absolute contravariant world tensor, which 
we shall call the stress-momentum tensor. The name is suggested by the result 
(207) 3, since in a Euclidean frame 
T"m = t"m _ e i" zm, ) 
P" = T"4 = - e i". 
T44=- f!· 
(211.4) 
Similarly, we define a space vector F suchthat in every Euclidean frame F n = (jk, 0). 
N ow consider the world tensor equation 
(211.5) 
where V(/) denotes the covariant derivative based on the Galilean connection r. r 
(Cf. Sect. 152.) In every Galilean (inertial) frame, (211.5) with .Q =k is equivalent to CAUCHY's first law; the equation that results from putting .Q =4 is the 
equation of continuity (156.5h- Thus Eq. (211.5) expresses the balance of mass 
and of linear momentum in world-invariant form. 
From the world-invariant form (164.2) of the continuity equation and from the 
definition (154.1) of the world acceleration vector, it follows that an alternative 
form of (211.5) is 
(211.6) 
1 Special cases have often been noted; e.g. LEVI-CIVITA [1928, 5, pp. 67-81], FINZI 
[1934, 2], KILCHEVSKI [1936, 5, §§ 1-2] [1938, 5, Part!,§ 10], PAILLOUX [1947, 11], MANARINI [1948, 13], ARZHANIKH [1952, 1]. Our approach differs basically from that of CARTAN 
[1923, 1, §§ 15-17], who makes the connection F!p depend upon the dynamicallaw. 
2 This concept is developed and emphasized as a postulate by NoLL [1957. 11, § 9]. 
556 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The classical Field Theories. Sect. 212. 
By substituting the components of the Galilean connection ( 154.1 0) into (211.6), 
we easily obtain an explicit form for CAUCHY's first law in an arbitrary rotating 
and deforming co-ordinate system 1 : 
(211.7) 
where uk - 0 xk ~~m, t) , ~ = ~ (z, t) being the transformation giving the general 
co-ordinates xk in terms of the co-ordinates zk in a Galilean reference frame 
(cf. Sect. 154), where xk is the acceleration as apparent to an observer in the 
~-system, and where the comma denotes covariant differentiation based upon 
the time-dependent metric g (~. t) in the rotating, deforming ~-system. 
212. Stress and couple resultants for shells. I. Direct theory. From the dynamical standpoint2, a shell may be regarded in one of two ways: as a surface il, 
or as a region between two surfaces il1 and il2 • In both cases, the shell is subject 
to normal forces as well as to tangential forces, and therefore its theory is that 
of a surface or body in three-dimensional space, not a merely intrinsic theory. 
To follow consistently the second view, in which the shell is regarded as a region 
in space, we must derive from the general theory of three-dimensional stress the 
nature of the forces and couples acting upon the shell. To follow consistently 
the first view, we cannot use the momentum principle and the stress principle 
as stated in Sect. 200, since the forms given there are appropriate only to bodies 
of non-zero volume. Rather, for the first approach we must Postulate new forms 
of the stress principle and the momentum principle. In the older work 3 on shells 
as models for solid bodies the two approaches are often confused, while theories 
of shells as two-dimensional models for soap films, water bells, etc., are so specialized as hardly to be typical. We present the two alternatives independently, 
beginning with the first. 
Consider a portion of a surface il bounded by a circuit c, and let this surface 
be in equilibrium subject to forces F and couples L per unit area. Fand L are 
three-dimensional vectors which may point in any direction in space. We Postulate 4 a stress principle for shells : The action of the part of the shell outside c 
1 Inability to read Ukrainian prevents us from following in detail the related work of 
KILCHEVSKI [1936. 5, §§ 1-4] [1938, 5, Part I, § 10]; like the corresponding result of 
McVITTIE [1949, 18, § 4], it seems to rest upon the unnecessary andin general unjustified 
assumption that there is a four-dimensional metric. The meteorologicalliterature abounds in 
special cases obtained by laborious transformation. 2 Just as the theory of stress in three-dimensional bodies is independent of kinematics, 
so also for the dynamics of shells we do not need to mention the theory of deformation given 
in Sect. 64. 3 While the dynamical equations are implicit in the pioneer work of LovE [1888, 6, '\[ 8], 
he did not disengage them from special elastic hypotheses and approximations, and they 
were first given in the forms (212.13), (212.14), (212.20), in special co-ordinates, by LAMB 
[1890, 6, § 4]. Later, LovE [1893. 5, § 339] remarked that LAMB's dynamical equations 
are valid for finite deformations if referred to the strained shell. Among the numerous repetitions of essentially the same argument as LAMB's we cite only the efficient vectorial 
derivation of E. REISSNER [1941, 5, §§ 3-4]. 
Fundamentally sharper reasoning has been applied in the two special cases when 1. there 
are no cross forces or moments, the shell being then called a membrane, or 2. the surface is 
plane, the shell being then called a plate. For the former, a geometrically intrinsic theory 
is easy; for the latter, the trivial geometry makes a rigorous treatment easy. The history 
of membranes and plates, which goes back to the eighteenth century, we make no attempt 
to trace; cf. TRUESDELL [1960, 4, §§ 48-49]. 4 Our treatment follows ERICKSEN and TRUESDELL [1958. 1, §§ 24-26], who shortened 
the argument of SYNGE and CHIEN [1941, 9, pp. 104-111]. SYNGE and CHIEN were the first 
to obtain the equations of equilibrium in the fully generalform (212.6). 
Sect. 212. Stress and couple resultants for shells. I. Direct theory. 557 
on the part inside is equipollent to a field of stress resultant vectors S(n) and couple 
resultant tensors M(n) located on c. The subscript n refers to the unit outward 
normal to c; of course, n is a vector defined intrinsically in ~. but S(n) and M(n) 
are three-dimensional fields. In analogy to (200.1) and (200.3), a mathematical 
expression of this postulate is 
~S(n)·ds+ JFda=O,) c d 
~(M(nJ+P X S(nJ)ds+ f(L+p X F)da=O, c d 
(212.1) 
where d s is arc length along c and p is the three-dimensional position veetor. 
According to the convention of Sect. App. 13 these vector integrals are understood 
to be written in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates. 
The argument in Seet. 203 can be adapted to two dimensions if we replace 
the tetrahedron by a curvilinear triangle on ~. The results, analogous to (203.3), 
(203.4}, and (203.5) are 
S(nJ =-S(-nJ• 
Sk _ Sk6n 
(n)- 6• 
(212.2) 
(212.3) 
In (212.3) the quantities n6 are covariant components of the unit normal to c 
in any curvilinear co-ordinate system vl, v2 on ~- Greek minuscule indices run 
from 1 to 2 in this section and the next one. By hypothesis, S(nJ is an absolute 
vector and M(n) is an axial vector, for given n; while to derive (212.3) we employed 
reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, the results are tensorial equations within 
the scheme of double tensors of Seet. App.15, and hence arevalid in all co-ordinate 
systems. The double tensors Sk 6 and Mk~ are the fields of stress resultants and 
stress couples. Wehave 
dim F = [M L -l r-2], dim L = [M 7-2], } 
dimS = [MT-2], dimM = [ML r-a]. (212.4) 
There are six components Sk~ and six components MH; the latter we may 
sometimes wish to replace by the components of the equivalent skew-symmetric 
tensor MkP 6• In the classical treatrnents of the theory of shells the vectors L 
and M(n) are assumed tangent to ~; this assumption, which is analogous tothat 
defining the non-polar case in three dimensions, reduces the number of nonvanishing components Mk 6 from six to four. 
Again we suppose the space co-ordinates reetangular Cartesian, we consider S 
and M as funetions of v only, and we substitute (212.3) into (212.1). Byreasoning strictly parallel to that in Sect. 205 we obtain as analogues of (205.2) and 
(205.10) the differential equations 
SH, 6 +Fk=O,} 
MkP6 + z[k SPJ6 + LkP = 0 (212.5) 
,d ,d ' 
where Mkpd and LkP are absolute alternating tensors equivalent to the axial 
veetors Mk 6 and Lk. In these equations the subscript comma indicates covariant 
differentiation with respeet to the surface metric a, except that z~ ozkjov6, 
where z = z(v} is a reetangular Cartesian equation of the surface ~. Now consider the equations 
Sk~ +Fk=O,} 
MkPIJ;d + x[k; 6 SPl d + LkP = 0 , (212.6) 
558 Co TRUESDELL and Ro TouPIN: The Classical Field Theorieso Secto 2120 
where the space co-ordinates and the surface Co-ordinates are arbitrary independently selected generat curvilinear systems, where x =x(v) is an equation of ~ 
referred to these two systems, where x':6 = oxkjov6, and where other occurrences 
of the semi-colon indicate the total covariant derivative (Appo 2002) 0 These equations 
are in double tensor form; when the space co-ordinates arereetangular Cartesian, 
they reduce to (21205), which have been proved valid for such co-ordinate systems; 
therefore (21206) are the generat differential equations of equilibrium for shellso 
We may continue to regard Sand M as functions of v only, or we may consider 
them to be functions of x also, as we pleaseo 
The elegant simplicity of this derivation should not conceal the complexity 
of the resulto When (21206h is written out, it assumes the form 
asH + { k } xf 5m 6 + { ; } 5k6 + p = o 
ovd mp ·6 t5; ' (21207) 
where {n:p} and {la} are Christofiel symbols based upon the space metric g 
and the surface metric a, respectively, the two metrics being related as usual: 
a6 E = gkm x':6 x~ o When {21206) 2 is written explicitly in terms of the axial vector 
Mk 6, it assumes the form 
(21208) 
These formulae involve doubly contravariant tensors considered as functions 
of v onlyo In terms of physical components, or of components allowed to depend 
on x as weil, they would take on still more complicated formso 
To assume L and JU tangent to ~ is equivalent to assuming the existence 
of surface fields U and Me~ such that 
{21209) 
To obtain equations of motion instead of equations of equilibrium, we may assign momentum to d and express its rate of change in terms of a surface density Ak, then replace 
pk by pk- Ak in (212o6h 0 However, the vector A does not bear any simple relation to the 
accelerations of points on d, and we prefer to postpone determining the effect of inertial 
force until the general discussion of relations between three-dimensional and surface variables 
in Secto 2130 
We now resolve all quantities into components normal and tangent to 11: 
Fk=F6 x~ +FNk, Lk=L6 +LNk, } 
5k6 = 5Yd ~7" +56 N"' Mk6 = MYd.x7" +Md Nk' (212o10) 
where N is the unit normal to l1o The following table connects the components 
occurring in (212010) with the terms usually employed inshell theory: 
F, L = normal components of specific applied force and coupleo 
F6, L6 = specific applied force and couple tangent to the shello 
56 = cross force resultanto 
5Yd = membrane stress resultanto 
M6 = cross moment resultanto 
M"d = couple resultanto 
According to the usual assumptions (21209), L =0 and Md =Oo The normal 
and shear components of 5" 6 in an orthogonal co-ordinate system are called 
normal and shear membrane stress resultants; the normal and shear components 
of MY 6 in such a system are called bending and twisting couple resultants, respectivelyo 
Sect. 212. Stress and couple resultants for shells. 559 
To express the equations of equilibrium in terms of tangential and normal 
componentsl, we use the identities (App. 21.6), (App. 21.2), and (App. 21.4) 2 to 
obtain from (212.1 0) 3 the following resolution: 
5k6;6 = (5Y~;ß- aar ba6 56) x7r + (5f6 + br6 5Y 6) Nk. (212.11) 
Substituting this result and (212.10) 1 into (212.6)1 yields 
(5Y6;6- aarbad 5 6 + F6) X~y + (56;6 + by6 5Y~ + F) Nk = 0. (212.12) 
Taking the scalar product of this equation by N yields as the condition for 
equilibrium of normal forces 
5°;o+byo5r~+F=O; (212.13) 
taking the vector product by N, the condition for equilibrium of tangential 
forces: 
5Y0;0 -araba656+FY=O. (212.14) 
Similar resolution of (212.6) 2 yields as the condition for equilibrium of bending 
moments 2 
(212.15) 
for twisting moments, 
MYO;o- ara ba6 Mo+ aro e~a 5a + LY = 0. (212.16) 
In these formulae, it is legitimate and natural to regard all fields as functions 
of v only and to interpret "; r5" as covariant differentiation based on a. Under 
the usual assumption L = 0, M 0 = 0, the total number of independent components 
of S and M is reduced from 12 to 10, the second term in (212.16) vanishes, while 
(212. t 5) reduces to an algebraic equation expressing the difference of shear 
resultants 5[121 as a linear combination of the four couple resultants Mr~. 
In works on shell theory it is customary to use in place of M the dual tensor B, 
defined as follows: 
(212.17) 
so that the physical components of these tensors in an orthogonal co-ordinate 
system satisfy the relations 
M<ll>=-B<21), M<12>=-B(22), M(21)=ß<u>, M(22)=ß(12). (212.18) 
Eqs. (212.15) and (212.16) representing the balance of moments may be expressed 
in terms of B: 
M;oo_ erob~ Boa+ ero5ro + L = 0, } 
Bvo;o- ava.ea.r b~Mo- 5" + C = 'o, (212.19) 
where C=ava.ea.rLY; when the classical assumption (212.9) is adopted, these 
equations reduce to 
(212.20) 
the former of which is especially interesting because it shows the tensors S and B 
to be non-symmetric except in special circumstances. 
1 This resolutionwas effected by SYNGE and CHIEN [1941, 9, p. 109] by use of the special 
co-ordinate system we explain in Sect. 213. 2 The fully general equations (212.15) and (212.16) were given by E. and F. CosSERAT 
[1909, 5, §§ 35-37]. who derived also forms in material co-ordinates. Cf. also HEUN [1913, 
4, § 20]. 
560 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 213. 
The dynamics of shells is not a mere two-dimensional analogue of the dynamics of threedimensional bodies (cf. Sect. 238). As is evident from the ideas used to formulate it and 
from the occurrence of the second fundamental form b in every one of its equations, shell 
theory concerns properties of two-dimensional idealizations of three-dimensional bodies. 
For an intrinsic analogue to the three-dimensional case, we should have to have a tensor p/; 6 
satisfying 
(212.21) 
where G is assigned. From (212.14), we see that an equation of this form emerges from 
shell theory if the cross force SY is known. In particular, when SY = 0 we obtain from 
(212.14) and (212.13) the equations 
St; 6,6+Ft;=O, b~; t;+F=O. (212.22) 
When, in addition, the couple resultants and assigned couples are zero, (212.15) reduces to 
(212.23) 
Eqs. (212.22) and (212.23) are said to describe a state of membrane stress. The four 
membrane stress resultants satisfy a system of two linear partial differential equations and 
two linear algebraic equations with coefficients which are determined by the surface 6. There 
exists an extensive theory of integration of this determined system. See also Sect. 229. 
213. Stress and couple resultants for shells. II. Derivation from three-dimensional theory. If we choose to regard a shell as a portion of material between 
.... .... 4 ........ .... ' Fig. 37. Shell regarded as a three-dimensional body. 
two surfaces !l 1 and !l2 , the theory 
of equilibrium and motion of a shell 
is derivable as a consequence of the 
three-dimensional theory. According 
to this view, the stress and couple 
resultants, instead of being introduced through a postulated twodimensional stress principle as in 
Sect. 212, should be defined in terms of the three-dimensional stress tensm: t. 
Moreover, a shell need not now be a body by itself: All results we are now going 
to derive hold equally for a shell which is but a part of a three-dimensional body, 
though this interpretation is unlikely to be useful. · 
The resultants Sk 6 and MM are defined by the condition that their action 
upon a curve c lying on a reference surface !l shall be equipollent to the action 
of the three-dimensional stress tensor tkm upon a finite surface h ( c) intersecting !l 
along c. E.g., 
(213.1) 
where n* is the unit outward normal to h ( c), and where our usual convention regarding integrals of vectors in curvilinear co-ordinates is understood (Sect. App. 17). 
For each curve c, the surface h ( c) is to be fixed once and for all, subject to the 
understanding that to a curve which is a part of c there corresponds a surface 
which is apart of h. The requirement (213.1) then defines SH uniquely. 
In the practice of shell theory, h is always taken as a surface swept out by 
the normals to !l along c, and it is always assumed that the surfaces !l1 and !lz 
are given by equations x0 = h1 (v) and xD = h2 (v), where x0 is the normal distance 
from !land where v1, '1!8 are curvilinear co-ordinates upon !l (Fig. 37). The quantity 
1 h2 - h1 1 is then the thickness of the shell at the point v on !l. In many applications the two surfaces are supposed given by the equations xD = ± h (v); in this case 
!l is called the middle surface of the shell. For the general theory, however, no 
such restriction is necessary, and the reference surface !l need not even lie within 
the shell. 
Sect. 213. Stress and couple resultants for shells. 11. Derived theory. 561 
It is natural to use a co-ordinate system1 in which one family of co-ordinate 
surfaces consists in the surfaces x" = const, which are parallel to .1. If a (v) and 
b (v) are the fundamental tensors of .1, then the spatial metric g (v, x0) assumes 
the form 
goo =t' 0 = 1, goa: =t'"' = 0, } 
ga:ß = aa:ß + 2x0 ba:ß + (x0) 2 ba:r b;; 
(213.2) 
i.e., the superficial components of g are of the form g = a · (1 + x0 b) 2• In most 
of the older researches, the Iines of curvature on .1 are chosen as co-ordinate curves, so that 
gn=an1+x ( OK )2 1 - ( 0 K )2- 1 ( ) 1 =11· g12=0, g22=a221+x 2 -22, 213.3 
g g 
where K 1 and K 2 are the principal curvatures of .1. From (213.2) we have 
where 2 
and also 
{oko} = {k0o} = 0 • 
{cx0
ß} = [<Xß, 0] =- b"''l (15); + x0 bß), 
{o~} =g"').bpy(15I+x0 bn, 
K* { k } = K* { ß } + oK* 
kcx ßcxa ox"' 
K* oiogVg _ oK* ~- axo· 
(213 .4) 
(213.5) 
With the above choice of surfaces and co-ordinates, the unit normal n* to h 
at (v, x") is related to the unit normal n to the generating curve c of h at (v, 0) 
as follows: 
nri = 0, n~ = nr (15~ + x0 b~), (213.6) 
while da =K* ds dx0 • From these facts and (213.1) we obtain the relations 
h2 
5"'ß = J tß'l (b~ + x0 b~) K* dx0 ' 
hl 
hz 
5" = - J t"' ° K* dx0 , 
hl 
hz 
B"'ß =-J xO tßr (15~ + xO b~) K* dx0 • 
h] 
(213.7) 
These definitions make the stress principle for shells, as stated in Sect. 212, 
a corollary of the three-dimensional stress principle, stated in Sect. 200. Thus 
it is legitimate to use the same notations as in Sect. 212. 
From (213.7) it is plain that the quantities 5"'fJ, 5", and B"'ß transform as 
surface tensors of the indicated variance. The physical components of these 
1 Special co-ordinate systems of this kind were used in many of the older researches on 
the theory of shells. General formulations were given by SYNGE and CHIEN [1941, 9, p. 109], 
ZERNA [1949, 39, § 2], GREEN and ZERNA [1950, 9, § 2], and others. 
2 K* >O, since the parameters v, x 0 are not admissible as co-ordinates if (1 + x° K1) ~ 0 
or (1 + x°K )~o. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 36 
562 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 213. 
tensors are the quantities usually employed in shell theory; e.g., if we make the 
special choice of co-ordinates leading to (213.3), we have 1 
hz 
5(11) = «n 5 11 = «n J t11 (1 + x° KJ) 2 (1 + x° K2) dxO' 
hJ 
ht~ 
= J 11 (1 + x° K2 ) dx0 , 
hJ 
h2--.. 
5(12) = J 21 (1 + x° K1) dx0 , 
hl 
hz~ 
5(21)= J 12(1 +x°K2)dx0 , 
hl 
hz~ 
5(1) =- f01(1 +x°K2)dx0 , 
h, 
hz ~ 
ß(ll)=- J x0 11(1 +x°K2 )dx0 , 
hJ 
hz ~ 
ß(I2)= - J x0 21 (1 + x° K1) dx0 , 
kJ 
etc., where, as usual, k~ is the matrix of physical components oft. 
(213 .8) 
We now find the reflection of CAUCHY's second law, in its narrower form 
(205 .11), upon the stress resultants and couples. Integrating the algebraic identity 
(213.9) 
across the shell and expressing the result in terms of the definitions (213.7), 
we obtain a formula identical to (212.20) 1 . This should not be surprising, since 
CAUCHY's second law is itself a condition for the balance of moments. The interesting thing about this result is its indication that the classical assumptions (212.9) 
of shell theory are consistent with the three-dimensional non-polar case, for it is the 
absence of three-dimensional applied couples and couple-stress that CAUCHY's 
second law in the narrower form (205.11) asserts. 
We now derive Eqs. (212.13) and (212.14) for a shell by integrating the 
corresponding components of CAUCHY's first law (205.2), thus showing that the 
balance of momentum for a shell as a whole is a consequence of the balance of 
momentum of the three-dimensional body with which we identify it, as indeed 
is physically plain 2• Since there are some formal difficulties in using general 
co-ordinates on the surface ~' weshall use the special metric components (213.3), 
one advantage of which is the form assumed by the Mainardi-Codazzi identities, 
VIZ., 
8Vgu - 0 [11-( OK )] - ( OK) o}'all ----a;2- - [}V2 yall 1 + X 1 - 1 + X 2 ov2 ' (213.10) 
and a similar formula obtained by interchanging 1 and 2, 1 and 2. 
1 The curvature factors were mentioned by LAMB [1890, 6, § 2] and were used in special 
cases by BASSET [1890, 1, §§ 5, 18]; the full set (213.8) was given by LovE [1893, 5, § 399], 
and the general equations (213.7) were formulated by GREEN and ZERNA [1950, 9, § 3]. 
For discussion of the mechanical significance of the resultants, cf. ZERNA [1949, 39, §§ 3-4]. 
Definitions not obviously equivalent to these were given by KILCHEVSKI [1938, 5, Part II, § 3]. 2 Üur derivation follows that of NoVOZHILOV [1943, 4] and of NOVOZHILOV and FINKELSTEIN [ 1943, 6, § § 1, 4 ], which is more general than that given independently by TRUESDELL 
[1945, 6, § 8]. Derivations in general co-ordinates have been sketched by CHIEN [1948, 7] and 
GREEN and ZERNA [1950, 9, § 3]. 
Secto 2130 Stress and couple resultants for shellso Ho Derived theoryo 563 
As the normal component of CAUCHY's first law (205 o2), from (205 Ao1) we have 
,, \1 { <>81 cva22 (1 + X° K2) 01] + -:.8 fall yaz2 vV uV -2 [yall (1 + X° KJ) ozJ} -l - K 1 (1 + x° K 2) f.i- K2 (1 + x0 K 1) 22 + (213°11) 
+ a~o (K* 00) + (! K* (f<o> - x<o>) = 0 0 
Integrating this equation from xO =h1 to x0 =h2 and taking account of (21308) 
yields 
lau , __ 1l'c.={ a 22 uv 
<>81 (ya;; 5<1>) + uv 
<>82 (yall 5<2>)} + l 
+ K1 5<11> + K2 5(22) +F = 0, 
providing we put h2 ~ h 
F = - f (! K* (f<o> - x<O>) oxO - K* 00 I 2 0 
~ ~ 
(213012) 
(213°13) 
The result (213012) is identical in form with (212013), in the co-ordinates employed 
andin terms of physical componentso 
As the tangential component of CAUCHY's first law (20502) corresponding to vl, 
from (205Ao1) we have 
, \,- {-;~dVa22 (1 + xO K2) 11] + -<>8 2 [Va11 (1 + x° K1) 12J} + 
tau ya22 vV uV 
+ 1 8 logV"ll (1 + xO K) 21- ~ 8 logj'a;; (1 + xO K) 22 + (213°14) Va22 8v2 2 Vau 8vl I 
+ Kl (1 + x° K:~) 01 + 8~0 (K*01) + (! K* (/(1)- x(l)) = 0, 
where (213o10) has been usedo lntegrating this equation from xO =h1 to xO =h2 
and taking account of (21308) yields 
(213°15) 
provided we put 
(213°16) 
The result (213015) is identical in form with (212014), in the co-ordinates employed 
and in terms of physical components, when y = 1o 
To complete the identification of the results obtained by integration of the 
three-dimensional equations with those of the direct shell theory of Sect. 212, 
we need to replace (213 013) and (213 016) by invariant formulae valid in general 
co-ordinates on the surface ~, as follows: 
36* 
564 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 214. 
Thus far, except in deriving (213.9) and its direct consequence (212.20)1, we 
have not assumed the three-dimensional stress tensor to be symmetric. To obtain 
the equation of moments, however, we rest content with the non-polar case and 
simply multiply the three-dimensional equation (213.14) by x0, then integrate 
across the thickness of the shell1• Thus follows 
l' a11 1v~{ a22 uv "o I(ya;; B<u>) + uv "o2 (~B<n>)} + l 
+ 1 o log Vau B< 1 o log ya;; B< -v- n>- -~- "vl 22)- a22 ov2 lall u 
- S<1> + C<1> = o, 
(213.18) 
where, in general co-ordinates upon 6, we have put 
C"' =-f2
e K* xo (c5~ + xO b~) (f -xY) dx0 - K* xO (c5~ + xO b~) t0Y1::. hl 
(213.19) 
The result (213.18) is identical in form with (212.20)2 , in the co-ordinates employed 
and in terms of physical components, when ct = 1. 
In comparing the results of this section with those in the preceding one, we 
must understand that it is impossible to prove that the quantities entering the 
two systems are identical, since the difference of basic assumptions and definitions in the two cases makes a statement of isomorphism the best that can be 
hoped for. What we have shown isthat no error can result if we choose to regard 
the surface fields S"'fl, SY, and B6 •, defined in terms of the three-dimensional 
stress tensor t by (213.7), as equivalent to the fields denoted by the same symbols 
in Sect. 212, where they were defined in terms of the double tensors Sand M, 
introduced a priori. 
If we accept this identification, then the results of this section show how the 
equilibrium theory of the previous section can be generalized to the case of motion. 
In (213.17) and (213.19) appears not only the assigned forces f but also the acceleration ~. From (213.17) we see that the effective force of inertia, per unit area 
and surface mass on 6, is not necessarily the acceleration of any particle on 6; 
rather, at a given point P on 6 it is a certain weighted mean of the accelerations 
at all points on the normal to 6 through P. Moreover, inertial forces occur also 
in (213.19) and hence affect the balance of moment of momentum-an unusual 
phenomenon in mechanics. Finally, even in the static case the effective surface 
Ioads F and C which enter the equations of equilibrium for shells are not merely 
the vector differences of the Ioads in the interior, but rather areweighted averages 
and differences, influenced by the thickness and the curvature of the shell aswell 
as by the forces and couples applied. 
214. Stress and couple resultants for rods 2• If we consider a rod simply as 
a curve c which may be the seat of dynamical actions, by considerations anal1 In the general case, the definitions (213.7)3 are no Ionger adequate, since additional 
resultant couples are produced by the couple stress m. Also, instead of simply multiplying 
the equations of linear momentum by 0 and then integrating, we should integrate (205.10). 2 For the plane case, the stress principle for rods and the appropriate special cases of 
(214.1), (214.2) and (214.7). independent of any hypothesis regarding the constitution of the 
material, were first given by EuLER [1771, 2, §§ 1-11, 35-40] [1776, 4, § 17]. For the history 
of the earlier special theories of rods and flexible lines by PARDIES, ]AMES BERNOULLI, and 
others cf. TRUESDELL [1959, 8, §§ 2-3, 7-14, 20-21, 25). 
ST. VENANT [1843, 3,, 3] was the first toremarkthat six equations are needed to express 
the equilibrium of rods which are twisted as weil as bent, but he did not succeed in obtaining 
them without special simplifying hypotheses. The general equations were given in principle, 
but very obscurely, by KIRCHHOFF [1859, 2, § 3), explicitly by CLEBSCH [1862, 2, §50). These 
Sect. 214. Stress and couple resultants for rods. 565 
ogous to those at the beginning of Sect. 212 we are led to postulate a stress 
principle for rods: At each point on a rod, the action of the material to one 
side upon the material to the other is equipollent to that of a stress resultant 
vector Sand a couple resultant M. These quantities have the physical dimensions 
[M L T-2] and [M L 2 T- 2], respectively. Properly, we should define them as 
acting on the opposite sides, + and -, of a cut through the rod; then analogously 
to (212.2) and (212.3), (203.3) we have 
(214.1) 
as the first consequences of the principle of equilibrium. Dropping the subscripts + and - but adopting an appropriate convention of sign, as the definitive condition of equilibrium we obtain 
(214.2) 
where "~" is the dual of the intrinsic derivative defined by (63.6), where p is the 
position vector with respect to a fixed origin, and where Fand L are the applied force 
and couple, per unit length. By substituting (214.2)1 into (214.2) 2 we obtain 
M+txS+L=O, (214.3) 
where t is the unit tangent to the rod c. 
A rod such that M = 0 if L = 0 is said to be perfectly flexible; such rods are 
often called strings. By (214.3), a necessary and sufficient condition for perfect 
flexibility is that the stress resultant S always be tangent to the rod. 
Since the two Eqs. (214.2)1 and (214.3) are in vectorial form, they are valid 
in an arbitrary curvilinear Co-ordinate system. It is customary, however, to 
refer them to a particular frame defined with respect to the rod c. Retaining 
full generality at the start, in the scheme of Sect. 61 let us assign any three linearly independent directors and reciprocal directors da and da to c. With Sk 
and Fk as the contravariant components of S and F, ~ and Lk as the covariant 
components of M and L, in general curvilinear Co-ordinates, we define corresponding anholonomic components: 
sa = d~Sk, 
P=d~Fk, 
Ma = d~Mk,} 
La- d~Lk. 
By (214.2)1 and the result dual 1 to the reciprocal of (63.10) 3 , we have 
!d~a_ = sa = d~ Sk + J~ Sk' l =- d~Fk- d~wmk Sk, 
(214.4) 
(214.5) 
and other early treatments are difficult to follow, sometimes imparting the impression that 
some approximation is made. E.g. LovE [1906, 5, § 254] says "the extension of the central 
line may be disregarded". In fact, as was noted by BASSET [1895, 1, § 2] (cf. also [1892, 
1, § 4]), Eqs. (214.7), analogaus to CAUCHY's laws, are exact when referred to the actnal 
position of the rod; just as in the three-dimensional theory, no question of approximation 
appears unless we attempt to refer the equations to a configuration assumed by the rod 
prior to its being loaded by the forces under which it is in equilibrium. The derivation given 
in the text is that of ERICKSEN and TRUESDELL [1958, 1, §§ 21-23], patterned on earlier 
work of E. and F. CossERAT [1909, 5, § 10] and HEUN [1913, 4, § 19]. 1 Note that w is not the F of Sect. 63 but rather the dual of W; neither is it tobe confused 
with the vorticity vector, which is denoted by the same kerne! index. 
566 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 214. 
where w is the wryness of the directors along c. Similarly 
dMa - M~ - - dk ( tP Sq + L ) + dm k M. -dS- a- a ekpq k a W m k' (214.6) 
Hence the statical equations in anholonomic components are 1 
dsa + wa Sb + pa = 0 ) ds b · ' 
dMa b b c _ ds - W a Mb + e0 b c t S + La - 0. 
(214.7) 
Thus far the director frame has been arbitrary. We now require it to be a 
unit orthogonal triad suchthat d1 =t, the unit tangent. By the dual of (63.9) 3 , 
the wryness w then satisfies Wab =-wba and may be interpreted as an angular 
velocity 2• The component 5 1, which is the projection of S onto the tangent 
to c, is called the specific tension in the rod; the components 5 2 and 5 3, the 
specific shearing forces; M 1, the specific twisting couple; M 2 and M 3, the specific 
bending couples. This special choice of directors, while not simplifying (214.7) 1 , 
implies that t1 = 1, 2 =t3 =0 and hence reduces the three components of (214.7) 2 
to the following explicit forms: 
(214.8) 
In analogy to the reasoning in Sect. 213, it should be possible to derive the equations 
for rods by integrating the three-dimensional equations or the equations for shells; using 
power series expansions, GREEN 3 has given a derivation of the former type. 
If F = 0, from (214.2h it follows that S = const; (214.3) then becomes a statement that 
M is a prescribed function of s. Since M is an axial vector, such a statement is a formal 
analogue of (196.3), the general condition for balance of moment of momentum, provided s 
and I are made to correspond. Such a correspondence may be carried further by taking the 
director frame of the rod as an orthogonal unit triad, so that the wryness w becomes the 
analogue of the angular velocity m. This observation forms the basis of KIRCHHOFF's 
1 Since by definition 
we have 
eabc = + Vi cabc det d~. Now 
hence 
g(det d~)2 = det gk m d~ df' = det ge( 
eabc = ± Ydetgef 10abc• 
where the sign is to be selected so as to agree with that of det d~. The quantity detgef is 
evaluated by the dual of (61.4). In particular, for a right-handed unit orthogonal triad we 
have 
eabc = 10abc· 
2 The classical notation for the component w2 a is T or - r; the other two independent 
components are written as ±" and ± "'. lt is important to remernher that in the exact 
theory all these quantities refer to the loaded rod. Cf. the footnotes on p. 565. 
3 [1959. 7]. Various earlier authors, e.g. KIRCHHOFF [1876, 2, Vorl. 28, § 5] and LovE 
[ 1906, 5, § 254 ], had given definitions of the stress resultants and couple resultants in terms 
of three-dimensional stresses, but their subsequent arguments rest on unnecessary and unrigorous limit processes rather than exact integration such asthat given for shells in Sect. 213. 
The method of power series expansionwas initiated by HAY [1942, 8, § 6]. 
Sect. 215. Partial stresses in a heterogeneaus medium. 567 
celebrated analogy between the motion of a rigid body and the deflection of an elastic rod 1• 
The result as usually presented takes on an appearance of greater complexity because (214.8) 
rather than (214.3) is used as the starting point. 
215. Partial stresses in a heterogeneaus medium 2• To discuss the transfer of 
momentum in a mixture, we employ the formalism of Sects. 158 to 159. Each 
constituent ~ is regarded .as being subject to partial stress t<Jl whose action upon 
any imagined closed diaphragm is equipollent to the action of all constituents 
exterior to the diaphragm upon the material of the constituent ~ within the 
diaphragm. The totalstresst is the sum of these partial stresses plus the apparent 
stresses arising from diffusion 3 : 
5\ 
t == L (t<Jl - (!'11 u 21 u<Jl) • 
21=1 
(215.1) 
The momentum of the constituent ~ need not be balanced by itself, as momentum 
may be transferred from one constituent to another. We define the supply of 
momentum P'11 of the constituent ~ by 
(215.2) 
where f 21 is the applied force per unit mass acting upon the constituent ~. Thus 
P'11 = 0 is a necessary and sufficient condition that the linear momentum of 
the constituent ~ be in balance by itself. Summing (215.2) over all constituents, 
by (159.6) and (215.1) we obtain the identity 
5\ 
(! L (Pt+ C<Jl ut) = e (xk- jk) - tkm,m, (215.3) ~(=1 
1 [1859. 2, § 3]. In the classical theory of elastic rods, M isalinear function of w, and 
in the theory of rigid motions, i) is a linear function of w; thus the analogy can be extended 
by setting the tensor of elastic moduli into correspondence with the tensor of inertia. A generalization is given by E. and F. CossERAT [1907, 2]. 2 Equations of the type (215.2) with special forms for P'}l arise in MAXWELL's kinetic 
theory of gas mixtures; for detailed references, see the next two footnotes. The first attempts 
at a continuum theory were given by DUHEM [1893. 1, Chap. li], REYNOLDS [1903, 15, § 38], 
and JAUMANN [1911, 7, §V]. In another work [1893, 2, Part I, Chap. VI], DuHEM derived 
from a variational principle the special case of (215.2) appropriate to mixtures of perfect 
fluids when c 21 = 0; the quantities p<Jl, which appear as multipliers, satisfy the appropriate 
special case of (215.5); hence DUHEM derived (205.2), again in the special case. Eq. (215.2) 
with p~1 = 0 was given by LEAF [1946, 7, Eq. (11)], but he did not derive from it any conclusion 
regarding the mean motion. We do not follow the argument by which PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, 
Chap. VIII, § 2] claims to infer CAUCHY's first law for a mixture. The definition (215.1) 
and the consequent (215.7) are in agreement with classical results from the kinetic theory of 
mixtures of monatomic gases but appeared only much later in the phenomenological theory; 
while NACHBAR, WILLIAMS and PENNER [1957, 10, §IV] attribute them to unpublished 
lectures of V. KARMAN (1950-1951), they were published by PRIGOGINE and MAZUR [1951, 
21, § 3] [1951, 17, § 2], who introduced the definition (215.2). assumed CAUCHY's first law 
(205.2), and derived the condition (215.5). Our treatment follows the rediscovery and completion of their results by TRUESDELL [1957. 16, § 6]. Cf. also the special theories of diffusion 
cited in Sect. 29 5. 
3 The diffusion velocities U<Jl are defined by ( 158. 7). Motivation for regarding- (!<JlU<Jl u<Jl 
as a stresswas given in Sect. 207. Cf. EcKART [1940, 8, p. 271]: "There is now the possibility 
that t may also depend on the u<Jl. but this complication may be ignored." In fact, (215.1) 
is fully consistent with the kinetic theory of monatomic gas mixtures as created by MAXWELL [1867, 2]. There, however, it is customary to define all quantities in terms of molecular 
motion relative to x, not :1:21 ; thus the partial pressure tensor P'}l of CHAPMAN and CowLING 
[1939, 6, Eq. (2.5.11)] and of HIRSCHFELDER, CURTISS and BIRD [1954, 9, Eq. (7.2.22)] is to 
be identified as a special case of our - t'll + 1!'11 u~1 u<Jl, not of our - t<Jl. 
568 
where 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
5t 
I= 'L,c91h1· 
91=1 
Sect. 216. 
(215.4) 
Therefore a necessary and sufficient condition that Cauchy's first law (205.2) shall 
hold for the mixture is1 
(215.5) 
This condition asserts that momentum supplied by unbalanced inertial forces 
of the several constituents plus momentum supplied through the creation of 
constituent diffusing masses shall add up to zero; in other words, the total momentum of the mixture is conserved. 
If we wish to separate the effect of diffusion, we define the interior part t 1 
of the stress by 
(215.6) 
By (215.1), CAUCHY's first law (205.2) then assumes the form 
5t 
ex" = t1.'!- L. (e91 u~ u;),". + e fk. (215.7) 
91=1 
In the case when the several constituents are not subject to applied couples, 
t 91 is symmetric; by (215.1) it follows that CAUCHY's second law in its usual form 
(205.11) is necessary and sufficient for balance of moment of momentum when 
linear momentum is already in balance. Altematively, t1"' =t'f:". For nonsymmetric partial stresses, it would be possible to construct a theory of balance 
of moment of momentum in steps parallel to those above for linear momentum, 
but we refrain from doing so. An interesting problern would b~ the characterization of cases when t is symmetric even though the t91 are not. 
111. Applications of Cauchy's laws. 
216. A generat theorem of mean value. If 'V is any continuously differentiahte 
function, from CAUCHY's first law (205.2) alone we have 
('V t,.".),". = tkm 'V,".+ 'V t""'.:"'' } = t,.". 'V,m +(!'V (z,. -/,.), (216.1) 
where we are using reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates. Integrating this identity 
over a volume v, by GREEN's transformation we obtain 
~'V t,.". da".=~ 'V t(n) da = J [tkm 'V,".+(! 'V (z,.- MJ dv. (216.2) f f " 
This simple theorem of stress means2, in principle the same as KELVIN's identity (119.1), has many important consequences. To derive it we have assumed the 
1 Under the special assumptions used in the kinetic theory of monatomic gas mixtures, 
including $91 = 0, this equation is implied by the work of MAXWELL [1867, 2] but does not 
appear explicitly; in the notation of CHAPMAN and CowLING [1939, 6, § 8.1], it assumes the 
5t - form I: n91 ,1 m91 0~1 = 0. 
91=1 
2 SIGNORINI [1933, 10, § 1j. MAXWELL [1870, 4, pp. 194-195] had obtained formulae for 
the mean values of Ie and Ilt in plane stress. 
Sect. 217. Theorem of power expended. 569 
stress itself to be continuously differentiable, but, as follows from (205.5), the 
presence of surfaces of discontinuity other than shock fronts does not invalidate 
it. Concentrated loads are included, according to the convention in Sect. 201. 
The use of (216.2) is two-fold: (1) to derive general theorems; (2) in the static 
case, when it becomes 
J tk m 'V. m d V = ~ 'V t(n) k da + J e 'V I k d V' (216.3) V ~ V 
it serves to give the mean value of tk m 'V,". over a body in terms of assigned functions, namely, the mean of 'V f over the body and the mean of 'V t(n) over the 
boundary. 
Putting 'V = 1 in (216.2) yields (200.1); since at bottarn only (200.1) has been 
used to derive it, (216.2) is thus equivalent to the balance of linear momentum 
for a continuous medium. 
Put 'V =z .... Then (216.2) yields a formula of FINGERthat will be discussed 
in Sect. 219, viz.: 
(216.4) 
Taking the skew-symmetric part yields 1 
~ Z[m tk]q daq = f [t[km] + (! Z[m (zk]- /k])J dv, (216.5) ~ V 
an expression for the torque exerted by the stress vectors acting upon d. This 
furnishes a new proof that when linear momentum is balanced, t is symmetric 
if and only if all torques are the moments of forces [cf. {205.10)]. 
The next sections present some applications of the theorem of stress means 2• 
217. Theorem of power expended 3• In (216.2), put 'V= zk and write the result 
in general co-ordinates. By ( 170.1 )3 , there emerges an expression 4 for the rate 
of change of kinetic energy sr in the material volume "f/': 
~ = J fkxk d 9JC + ~ t(n)kxk da- J tkm xk, ... dv. (217.1) 
-y [/' -y 
Thus the change of kinetic energy may be thought of as threefold: 
1. Increase at the rate work is done by the assigned force f. 
2. Increase at the rate work is done by the stress vector on the bounding 
surface. · 
3. Decrease at the rate tkmxk,m per unit volume in the interior. 
By the transport theorem (81.3), an alternative form 5 is 
aa~ = ~ (tkm_ ~ ex2b%')xkda ... + f (efkxk-tkmxk,m)dv. (217.2) 
V 
Both of these results also follow easily from the identities 
n __!_ x2 = n xk x = (tkm x ) - tkm x + n jk x , ) <:: 2 <:: k k , m k, m o: k 
:t ( ~ e x2) = (tkmxk- ~ ex2xm),m- tkmxk,m + e fkxk. 
(217.3) 
------
1 RA YLEIGH [ 1900, 9]. 
2 The approach is that of CisoTTI [ 1940, 6] [ 1942, 3]. 3 A general discussion of the definitions of work and power is given by BEGHIN [1951, 1]. 4 STOKES [1851, 2, § 49], UMOV [1874, 6, § 3]. Cf. also V. MISES [1909, 8, § 10]. 
5 UMOV [1874, 6, § 5]. 
570 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 217. 
There have been many attempts 1 to identify one or another of the flux terms as 
"the" flux of mechanical energy, but such attempts are futile for the general 
reason given in Sect. 15 7. Our interpretation above does not share this defect 
because it refers simultaneously to all the terms in the equation. 
The important scalar 2 
(217.4) 
which figures in all these expressions, is called the stress power; i t is a measure 
of the dissipation of kinetic energy incident upon stretching and spin of the 
medium. By (90.1} we have 
{217.5) 
The symmetric part of the stress does work in stretching the body, while the 
skew-symmetric part does work in spinning the elements of the body 3. In view 
of the generalized form (205.10) of CAUCHY's second law, we have 
P = t(kp) dkp + (mkPq,q + (! tkP) WkP" (217.6) 
In particular, when m =0 the work of spinning depends solely on the assigned 
couples l. 
If we decompose the stress according to {204.6), where p is any scalar, we get 
p =- p Id + v<kml dkm + t[kmJ wkm· 
In terms of the deviators 0d and 0t, we have 
P =-P Id + t<km) odkm + t[kml wkm• ) 
=- p Id + ot(km) dkm + ikm] Wkm• 
=-P Id + ikml odkm + ot[kml wkm• 
where p is the mean pressure (204.7). 
{217.7) 
(217.8) 
Since the three terms in this expression vanish, respectively, when there is no expansion, 
no isochoric stretching, and no spin, it is often stated that this decomposition separates the 
work done into a part arising from change of volume, a part from change of shape, and a 
part from rotation. While this statement seems to do no harm, it is difficult to attach 
meaning to it, since such a decomposition is not unique. Indeed, Iet F(t, d) be any scalar 
function oft and d which vanishes both when Id = 0 and when 0d = O; e.g., Id II,d· From 
(217.8) we have 
P = [...:... pld + F(t, d)] + [t(km)Odkm- F(t, d)] + t[kmlwkm• {217.9} 
and the sentence following (217.8) applies equally to this decomposition. Neither can we 
impose the stronger requirement that the respective rates vanish only in the special classes 
of motion mentioned, since this is not so even for (217.8): e.g. the second term vanishes when 
t is spherical, no matter what the motion. In order to secure uniqueness for the decomposition 
(217.8) we may add the requirement of linearity in the velocity gradient, but there appears 
to be no physical motive for such a requirement. Alternatively, we may find significance 
for (217.8) indirectly in the maximal decomposition (App. 43.1). 
The stress power P is easily expressed in terms of a reference state. From 
{217.4}, (210.4) 2, and {20.9} follows 4 
p dv = tkm xk,m dv = i TkM x:nMxk,m dv' } 
T kM' dV TKM k m ' dV = Xk;M = X;K X;MXk,m · 
(217.10) 
1 E.g. WIEN [1892, 14], VaLTERRA [1899, 3], MATTIOLI [1914, 7, § 5], HEINRICH [1952, 
10] [1955. 12]. 
2 STOKES [1851, 2, § 49]. 3 VoiGT [1887, 5, Chap. I, § 3], CoMBEBIAC [1902, 2]. 4 KIRCHHOFF [1852, 1, p. 771]. 
Sect. 218. Potential energy. 571 
When the variables X are material, by (95.7) 2 and (95.16) we may put (217.10) 
into the form1 
P dv = (T(rxß) E + T[rxß] Q ) dV. rxß rxß 0• (217.11) 
reducing in the non-polar case to 2 
P dv = tkmd dv = T"ß E dV. km rxß 0 • (217.12) 
218. Potential energy. The theorem of power expended takes on a simpler 
form in the special case when the field of extrinsic and mutual forces is steady 
and lamellara: 
U = U(x). 
If we set 
U=fUdm, 
..y 
then for a material volume "f/ we have by ( 156.8) 2 and (72.4) 
(218.1) 
(218.2) 
ü = J u dm = .r u,kxkdm =-.r t.xkdm. (218.3) 
..y ..y ..y 
Thus the rate at which the forces f do work is the time derivative of a function 
- U of the set of particles comprising the body. In this case U is called the potential energy; force fields satisfying (218.1) are sometimes called conservative 4• 
Substituting (218.3) into (217.1) yields 
~ + ü = p t(n)kxkda- .r tkm xk,mdv. (218.4) 
!/' ..y 
The rate of change of the sum of the kinetic and potential energies is thus expressible entirely in terms of the work done by the stresses. 
The assumption (218.1) has produced a result having the form of an equation 
of balance ( 15 7.1). Further terms may be expressed as time derivatives of set 
functions by adding further assumptions. We divide the total stress t into two 
parts, 
(218.5) 
such that the former, which we call the elastic stress, is derivable from a strain 
energy a(x~") according to the formula 
(218.6) 
where the X" arematerial co-ordinates and where ETk" is PIOLA's double vector 
(210.4)1 . The remaining stress, nt, will be called the dissipative stress. For the 
stresspower (217.4), by (217.10)a, (76.2h, and (156.2) 2 we obtain 
P -
- E D ( tkm + tkm) x· k,m-e;E - (! T k "x-;.-+ ,e< D tkmx" k,»P l = eä+ vtkmxk,m• 
The total strain energy (5 is defined by 
® == f eadv. 
..y 
1 E. and F. CossERAT [1909, 5, §§51- 52, 54- 55]. 
2 E. and F. CossERAT [ 1896, 1, § 15, Eq. (30)]. 3 In the homochoric case, (218.1) is equivalent to (207.1), with V=(! U. 
(218.7) 
(218.8) 
4 The concepts used here arose in the early development of mass-point mechanics. In 
continuum mechanics they are rather obvious and unimportant. 
572 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 218. 
From (218.7} and (218.4) follows 
~ + Ü + ® = p t(nlkx"da- f nt""'x,.,".dv. (218.9} .9' -r 
While the decomposition (218.5) is always trivially possible in infinitely many 
ways, the dissipative stress nf will generally possess no specially simple property. 
To obtain a conservation law as at the end of Sect. 157, we formulate assumptions such that the right-hand side of (218.9} vanishes, so deriving the first 
theorem of conservation of mechanical energy1 : Assume that 
1. The total stress is the sum of an elastic stress given by (218.6) and a dissipative 
stress,· 
2. The dissipative stress does no total work; and 
3. The total stress vector on the boundary is normal to the velocity there; 
then 
sr + u + s = const. 
In the still more special case when 
a(x" ... ) = a(J) = a(vfv0). 
from (218.6) and (17.8) we have 2 
hence 
oa 
:n; =-- = :n; (v): ov 
(218.10) 
(218.11) 
(218.12) 
(218.13) 
The elastic stress is hydrostatic. Conversely, if t =-:n; 1 and :n; = :n; (v), we may 
infer {218.11). In this case, since a=- J:n:dv, for the total strain energy (218.8) 
we may write 
S=-f(f:n:dv)dv. 
-r {218.14) 
As we remarked in Sect. 217, in an isochoric motion a hydrostatic pressure does 
no work. Combining this observation with the result above, we get a second 
theorem oj conservation of mechanical energy 3 : In the first theorem, replace 
1 by 
1~. The total stress is the sum of a hydrostatic pressure and a dissipative stress; 
and 
1~. Either the motion is isochoric or the Pressure is a function of the density only; 
retain assumptions 2 and 3; then (218.10) follows, with the total strain energy being 0 
in the isochoric alternative while given by (218.14) otherwise. 
Fora stationary region on whose boundary fcn> is normal, the third condition 
for both theorems is satisfied in virtue of (69.2). Also, it is easy to formulate 
assumptions under which the surface integral in (218.4) or (218.9) may be expressed as the time derivative of another surface integral. For example, if we 
apply the stress boundary condition (203.6), assume that the surface Ioad s 
1 Suggested by the somewhat vague analysis of GREEN [1839, 1, pp. 248-250] and KELVIN [1855. 4, § 187], given in essentially the above form by LovE [1906, 5, § 125]. 2 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 265]. 
3 Due in principle to HELMHOLTZ [1858, 1, § 4], though it may be traced back to D'ALEMBERT in restricted cases. 
Sect. 219. The virial theorem. 573 
satisfies sk=- Bk where B = B(x); then when .9 is stationary we have 
p t(n)kxkda = p skxkda = -lh, where 5B = p B da. {218.15) 
f/' f/' f/' 
In this case, from (218.4) follows 
~ + Ü + ~ =-J P dv. (218.16) 
r 
We leave it to the reader to formulate conservation theorems appropriate to 
this case. 
While the requirements 1 and 1~ may always be satisfied trivially, and while 
there are many cases where requirement 3 is relevant, the other requirements 
are satisfied only in restricted elastic and hydrodynamic situations. Our purpose in giving these theorems here is to make it clear that such a conservation 
law as (218.10) is not to be expected in any typical situation in continuum 
mechanics, where dissipation of energy is the rule, not the exception. 
219. The virial theorem1 . Put 
IDmk==fzmikdm, 2S'rmk=fzmzkdm, (219.1) 
r r 
the quantity- 2S'rmk being the total apparent stress due to transfer of momentum 
(Sect. 207). Then (216.4) may be written 
{219.2) 
The skew-symmetric part of this equation was considered in Sect. 216. To interpret the symmetric part, notice that 
W(mk) = t ~mk• 
where ij is EULER's tensor (168.4) 1 with a =0. From (219.2) follows 
t (i:mk = 2S'rmk + P Z(m tk)q daq + J (e Z(m fk)- t(km)) dv, 
f/' r 
the trace of this equation being 2 
(219.3) 
(219.4) 
(219.5) 
where we write G: for G:k k, the polar moment of inertia of the body about the 
origin, where S'r is the kinetic energy and where p is the mean pressure {204.7). 
The typical application of these results is to obtain time means by integration 
with respect to t, often under the added assumption that certain terms are 
periodic. 
1 The quantity 1: Fa· Pa was introduced into statics by MöBius [1837, 3, § 123] and a studied by ScHWEINS [1849, 2] [1854, 2], who called it the "Fliehmoment" of the forces. 
Its introduction in the dynamics of mass-points is due to }AcOBI [1837, 2, § 6] [1866, 2, 
Vierte Vorl.]. Cf. also LIPSCHITZ [1866, 3] [1872, 3], CLAUSIUS [1870, 1], VILLARCEAU [1872, 
4]. Herewe follow a generalization due to FINGER [1897, 3, §I] and elaborated by PARKER 
[1954, 18, § § 1, 3]. Cf. also the hint of MAXWELL [1874, 2, p. 410]. 2 CISOTTI [1923, 2, § 3] [1940, 6, § 6] [1942, 3]. 
574 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classica! Field Theories. Sect. 220. 
220. SIGNORINI's theory of stress means. A more useful application of FINGER's 
virial formula (216.4) has been found by SIGNORINI 1• Set 
'oakm-PZmtkqdaq- fzm("ik-fk)dim, (220.1) d V 
where 'o is the volume of v. If we use a superposed bar to denote a mean 
value over the body, (216.4) is equivalent to 
{220.2) 
In the static case, the quantities ak m may be calculated from the applied loads 
only, so that (220.2) furnishes the mean stresses directly in terms of known quantities. 
Simple as is the reasoning used to derive (220.2), the result is important: While 
CAUCHY's first law (205.2) in itself constitutes an underdetermined system and 
is thus insufficient to yield unique values for the stresses, its corollary (220.2) 
- T - T 
Fig. 38. Body subject to intemal 
and extemal normal pressure. 
Fig. 39. Body subject to tensile Ioad. 
enables us to calculate the mean stress uniquely and independently of the physical 
constitution of the material. 
We now give SIGNORINI's examples, all for the static case. 
1. Torque. If m=O on ~ and l=O in v, a[kml is the torque acting on v. If 
a[kmJ=O, (220.2) yields tkm=tmk· This is consistent with CAUCHY's second law 
(205.11), which holds under the stronger assumption that m =0 throughout v. 
If akm = 0, the load on v is said to be astatic. From (220.2), a necessary and sufficient condition for astatic load on v is 
(220.3) 
2. Hydrostatic pressure. Suppose v is the region between a surface ~o subject 
to hydrostatic pressure Po and a surface ~; subject to hydrostatic pressure P; 
(Fig. 38), and suppose f = 0. Then if we write c for the volume of the cavity, 
from (220.2) follows 
(220.4) 
This shows that hydrostatic loading always gives rise to a stress system which is 
hydrostatic in mean 2• Moreover, if Po~P; and Po>O, the mean normal stress 
is a pressure. 
3· Tensile loading. Let a body be subject to two equilibrated concentrated 
forces T and -T, acting at points a distance L apart (Fig. 39). Choosing the 
1 [1932, 13, §§ 1-2]. In [1939, 11], SIGNORINI applied these results to the motion of 
rigid bodies. 
2 NARDINI [1952, 14] has shown that when a body is subject to equalloads applied at the 
vertices of a regular polyhedron and directed toward its center, the mean stress is hydrostatic. He has obtained a similar result for Ioads applied at the vertices of a regular polygon. 
Sect. 220. SIGNORINI's theory of stress means. 575 
axis of z1 parallel to T, from (220.2) we get 
- LT 
tn = -b-, (220.5) 
while all other tk m vanish. Thus tensile loading gives rise to simple tension in mean. 
4. Body rotating steadily about a principal axis of inertia. Consider a body 
in steady rotation at angular speed w about the z1-axis, so that z1 =0, z2= -w2 z2 , 
z3 = -w2z3 • In order that the force and torque acting on the body be zero, 
we must have 
[zkdm =O l 
and J zl zk diDl = 0, (220.6) 
k =2,3; 
that is, the axis must pass 
through the center of mass and 
coincide with a principal axis 
of inertia. From (220.2) we get 
t _ ~kk ) kk- b ' (220.7) 
k = 2, 3 (unsummed), 
where Cfkm is EULER's tensor 
(168.4h with a=O, and all Fig.40. Heavysolidonanaxle. 
other tk m vanish. 
5. Heavy solid on an axle 1• Consider a heavy solid on an axle which makes 
an angle 'P with the horizontal, being supported by a hinge at one end, a bearing 
at the other (Fig. 40). Choose the zcaxis along the axle, the z2-axis normal to 
it, the origin at the hinge, and the plane of zcz2 vertical. The loads are equilibrated; the reaction S of the hinge, being located at the origin, makes no contribution to (220.1); the reaction B of the bearing, being directed along z2 at a 
point where z2=z3=0, contributes only to a21 , but need not be mentioned in 
the non-polar case, since then a21 = a12 , and ll:t 2 can be calculated without knowledge of B. By (165.1), from (220.2) we calculate 
tJ t11 =- jffi c1 sin 1p, tJ t12 =- jffi c2 sin 'P = tJ t21 , tJ t22 = jffi c2 cos 'P, (220.8) 
where c is the vector from the hinge to the center of mass and jffi is the weight 
of the body and axle. All other mean stresses vanish. For the mean value of 
the mean pressure p, we have 
(220.9) 
where h is the height of c above the hinge. Thus p is a pressure or a tension 
according as c is above or below the hinge. When the axle is horizontal and c2 =f= 0, 
t2 2 is the only stress which does not vanish in mean; when the axle is vertical 
and the center of mass lies upon it, we have the case of a body balanced upon 
a single point, and the resulting expression for t11 , the only non-vanishing mean, 
agrees with (220.5). 
1 This example and the next are due to TEDONE [1942, 13, §§ 2-3]. 
576 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 221. 
6. Pendulous body. Consider a body swinging rigidly about a fixed point 
(Fig. 41) located at distance L from its center of mass. So that the motion be 
possible, we assume the support pin is parallel to a principal axis of inertia, 
while the motion takes place in a plane containing the other two; we take these 
axes as co-ordinate axes. Since the co-ordinates of the center of mass are c1 =L, 
c2=0, the only contribution made by the weight Q9 to the _,...".Zz 
- bak". is made to ba11 and is of amount ~L cos cp, where cp is 
the angle of inclination to the vertical. From (143.6), for 
the components of acceleration in an inertial frame instantaneou~lycoincidingwith the co-ordinate frame we get- ~ z2, 
-~ +~z , 0. From (220.2) then follows 
bt11 _ ~L coscp + 11 • •• bt22 22 ,} (220_10) 
bt12 - cp 22 • bt21 -- cp (~11 • t3k- 0. 
Fig. 41. Pendulous body. 
That t12 =I= t21 except when 11 = 2 2 = 0 or when the angular 
acceleration vanishes is because a pendulous body not devoid 
of rotary inertia must be provided with a restraining torque 
from the support if it is to execute an accelerated rotation. 
221. Moments of stress. Setting 
bbpqr= ~zpzqt,".da".- J zpzq(z,-f,) diDl = ~bqpr• 
f " 
in (216.2) we put \II =ZpZq and obtain1 
Therefore 
t,p Zq + t,q Zp = bpqr• 
------1 
t(pq) z, + t[pr] Zq + t[qr] Zp = 2 (bqrp + bprq- hpqr} = Cpqr• 
(221.1) 
(221.2) 
(221.3) 
Henceforth we consider only the non-polar case. From (221.3) follows then 
(221.4) 
so that the second moments of the load determine the mean values of all the 
first moments of the stresses. 
Since bpqr=c,pq+c,qp in the non-polar case, the first moments of the stress 
determine the second moments of the Ioad. It is impossible that this one-to-one 
correspondence between moments of the Ioad and moments of the stress can 
continue indefinitely, for if it did, the stress would be determinate from the Ioad, 
while in fact CAUCHY's laws form an underdetermined system. lndeed, we 
have tpq=apq from CAUCHY's first law alone; to obtain (221.4), we use the second 
law as weil, reducing the number of independent stress moments tpq z, from 27 
to 18, the number of independent Ioad moments. For higher moments, the 
number of independent Ioad moments of a given order is much less than the 
number of independent stress moments of the next order, and thus the full set 
of Ioad moments is insufficient to determine all the stress moments. 
To calculate the higher moments 2, set 
tJ b!:'bc == ~~ z~ 4 t,".da".- f ~ z~ 4 (z, -/,) diDL (221.5) f " 
1 SIGNORlNI [1933, 10, § 2]. A special study of the bpq is made in [1932, 12]. 2 GRIOLI [1953, 12, § 1] [1952, 8, § 1]. 
Sect. 222. Estimates for the maximum stress. 577 
The bn, for which a + li + c = n are the load moments of ordern, being-! (n + 1) x 
(n+2) in number; for n=1 they reduce to the a,p; for n=2, to the bpqr· By 
putting W =z~z~z~ in (216.2), we obtain an equation satisfied by the )n(n+1) 
stress moments of order n: 
at, z~ zgz~+lit, z~z~ z~+ct, z~zgz~ =li~~'' (221.6) 
on the understanding that any term in which the exponent " - 1 " appears is 
to be annulled. From the choice a = n, li = c = 0, we get 
t,sz~- 1 = ~ Pi'~ (s unsummed, n ~ 1), (221.7) 
where p'f~ denotes b~~c with exponent n for zs and with the other two exponents 
taken as 0. From the choice a = n-1, li = 1, c =0, we get 
(n- 1) t,k z~ 2 zs + t,sz~- 1 = qJ:Jn (k unsummed), (221.8) 
where qJ:J n denotes b~~, with n -1 for the exponent of zk, 1 for the exponent of zs, 
and 0 for the third exponent. When k =r, (221.8) and (221.7} yield in the nonpolar case 
t zn 2 z = - 1
- [q''l - ..!_ prsl] (r unsummed) . " , s n- 1 rsn n rn (221.9) 
From (221.7) and (221.9) we see that when n ~ 3, the values of the load moments 
of order n determine unique values for at least 15 of the stress moments of order n 
in the non-polar case. 
222. Estimates for the maximum stress. SrGNORINI was the first to observe 
that a lower bound for the maximum stress is determined by the loading. Here 
we present generalizations and extensions of his work by GRIOLI 1• 
Considering only the non-polar case, write 
ti-tn, t2 = t22• t3 = taa. } 
t4=t2a=ta2• t,=ta1=t13• t6=t12=t21; 
(222.1) 
let Q'l1, W. = 0, 1, ... , m be a set of functions orthogonal over v, with mean norms 
W1~ gi ven by b W1~ = f Qfu d v ; let kb, , li, c = 1, 2, ... , 6 be the symmetric coeffi- V 
cients of any constant positive semi-definite form; and let Cb 21 , li=1, 2, ... , 6, 
W. = 0, 1, ... , m, be any constants. Then 
0~~ J L kb,(tb-Cb 21 Q~ )(t,-C,!BQ!B)dv,) V b, m:,~ 
= I. kb, tbt, + I. kb, cb'll (W?fu c,'ll- 2 Q'l1 t,) . b, c b, c, ~~ 
(222.2) 
Choosing the constants C, 21 so that 
c,'ll = Q<Ht,fW?~~. (222.3) 
from (222.2) we infer 
I. kb, tb t, ~ L kb, Q~i tb Q'l1 t,fW?~. (222.4) 
b,c b, c, 'l1 
If the form whose coefficients are kbc is positive definite, equality holds in (222.4) 
if and only if 
(222.5) 
1 [1953, 12, § 2] [1952, 8, §§ 3- 5]. In [1952, 9, §§ 1-3] GRIOLI applies these results 
to plates of arbitrary thickness. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. Ill/1. 37 
578 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 222. 
This is in itself an interesting observation: For all states of stress yielding given 
means Qm t0 , that given by (222.5) minimizes 2: k0 c t0 t, for any positive definite 
form. o,c 
The inequality (222.4) may be used to estimate the values of the stresses if 
the means Q'll t0 are known. To this end, in particular cases, we employ the 
results of Sects. 220 and 221. For example, if we choose the origin at the centroid 
and the co-ordinate axes along the principal axes of geometrical inertia of v, 
so that J zk dv = 0, J zk zm dv = 0 if k =f=m, then the functions 1, z1 , z2, z3 form an 
" " -- orthogonal set, with Wl~=1, b WC~=J zf dv. The values of Q'll t0 are given by 
" 
l
l-•----2/----_____,·1 (220.2) and (221.4). If we introduce for l t 1 the quantities apq and Cpqr a notation 
! t t l parallel to (222.1), then (222.4) yields 
,--------+---Zz Signorini's inequality1 : 
z, 
Fig. 42. Normally loaded beam. 
Examples. 1. Taking one of the k0 , as 1 and all other kbc as 0 yields 
3 2 
tglmax ~ t'g ~ ag + 2: cvi- · e=l W1e 
2. In order that the stress satisfy the condition 
'Lk0 ,t0 t,;;:;,K, K = const 
b,c 
the loads must satisfy 3 L kvc(abac + .L CveCce/WC~) ;;:;,_ K 2 • 
o,c e=l 
(222;6) 
(222.7) 
(222.8) 
(222.9) 
SIGNORINI 2 has applied (222.7) to the equilibrium of a beam which is a horizontal reetangular block in its deformed state when supported at its two ends, loaded by its own 
weight and by arbitrary forces acting upon its upper and lower faces. Choosing co-ordinates 
so that the axis of z1 points vertically downward through the center of mass, while the 
axis of z2 is horizontal (Fig. 42), we have / 2= /3= 0, /1 = g; on the surface, the z2 and z3 
components of Ioad vanish, while the z1 component may be arbitrary. From (220.1) and 
(221.1) wegetat once a 22 =0, c222=0, c223=0, c221 = -!b221 , and hence by (222.7) follows 
I t 
2 
I 
max 
:2 
- ~_2_!_1_ \DCI = ~ 2 C • (222.10) 
where c is the radins of gyration of the cross-section. We now evaluate b221 • If we write 
p (z2) for the density of total load per unit length along the beam, taking account of the 
contribution of the two supports, which equilibrate the totalload on the beam, from (221.1) 
we get 
l l 
- bb221 = l 2 f p(s) ds- J s2 p(s) ds. 
-l -l (222.11) 
The total bending moment acting at z2 in virtue of the reaction at the end z2= -l and of 
the load on the part of the beam to the left-hand side of z2 is given by 
l ~ 
m(z2) =- (l + z2) • ;l J (l- s) p(s) ds + J (z2 - s) p(s) ds. 
-1 -1 
(222.12) 
1 [1933. 10, § 4]. 2 [1941, 7]. The result is generalized somewhat in [1954, 22]. 
Sect. 222. Estimates for the maximum stress. 579 
l 
If we write m for the mean value of m (z2). i.e. 2lm ~ f m (s) ds, it is easy to show from 
(222.12) and (222.11) that -1 
~lb221 = 4m, (222.13) 
where ~ is the cross-sectional area. Thus (222.10) may be written in the form 
lt2lmax ~ 1
;c1
-. (222.14) 
Various special theories of the strength of beams assume formulae similar to (222.14); it 
furnishes a general bound with which such theories must agree if they are to be statically 
possible. 
GRIOLI has discussed the use of (222.4) for choices of the Q'll suggested by the results 
in Sect. 221. 
The inequality (222. 7) can be generalized easily, since the same choice of the k0 c with 
general Q'll in (222.4) yields (-Q )2 
21 >2>"\' ~(lb lbmax=lb=L_, 2 
~( rnl'll (222.15) 
Other estimates for the maximum stress 1 follow immediately from (221.7) and (221.9): 
lBIP1')1 
l
1
rslmax ~ nJiz.r s~ dv' I 
m I q\!A- PrMn I (222"16)· 
ltrrlmax ~ ( n-1 )JI 2 1 · z~ z5 dv V 
From the identity 
L: k<JI J Q'll t,. dv = m L: k<JI Q~ltrs• <Jl V <Jl 
(222.17}· 
where the k~( are arbitrary constants, follows 
L: I k~~ Q'll t,. I 
lt I >m ~~ rs max = -=L;=----Jcc-l-k~~Qi8l dv • 
!llv 
(222.18} 
GRIOLI 2 has shown that in each case there exists a particular choice of the constants k~( 
rendering the bound (222.18) sharper than (222.15). In fact, with r and s held fixed, put 
k<JI = Q'll t,./Wl&. ( 222.19) 
Then by the Schwarz inequality and the orthogonality of the Q'll follows 
[ 
l;(Q'llt,.)2/rnlfu ]2 
j ~ l Q!!3 t,.Q!BI dvfrnl~- ' 
[L (Q~t t,.l 2/M§tj 2 
'll 
(222.20) 
37* 
580 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 223. 
Since the left-hand side is the square of the bound given by (222.18), while the last righthand side is the bound given by (222.15). it is established that with the choice of constants 
given by (222.19). the bound (222.18) isthebest so far obtained. In order to obtain a best 
possible bound of the type (222.18), we should have to choose the kw. so as to maximize the 
right-hand side. 
GRroul has applied (222.18) to the estimation of the maximum longitudinal stress in 
a cylinder of arbitrary cross-section. 
BRESSAN2 has observed that if we take '*' as a vector b in (216.2), in the static and nonpolar case follows 
ekmbk,m=Ltaba=N== ~ r~bktkmdam+ fefkbkdt•]· 
a 6 " 
(222.21) 
where a notation analogaus to (222.1) is used. Let b(q) be the value of bq when bis a solution 
of the compatible system of five linear partial differential equations 
ba = 0 for a =I= q. (222.22) 
and N(q) the corresponding value of N. Then (222.21) yields tq b(q) = N(q), and hence 
{222.23) 
For a particular solution in cylindrical polar co-ordinates, BRESSAN has worked out a full 
set of such bounds explicitly. 
223. Statically determinate problems. In the practice of mechanics a problern 
is said to be statically determinate if the state of stress may be determined without 
knowledge of the displacement or motion. Since, as will appear in Subchapter IV, 
it is always possible to solve the equations of motion in terms of arbitrary functions, and since arbitrary functions often occur in what are called statically 
determinate solutions, it does not seem that the term has any precise meaning 3. 
Weshall use it as a title for the following collection of problems arising from direct 
hypotheses regarding the stress, independently of any possible constitutive equations. 
First, a system of stresses whose reetangular Cartesian components are constant is said tobe uniform. Obviously a uniform stressisanull stress (Sect. 205). 
Also, from {205.2) we see that a body subject to uniform stress, or to any null stress, 
moves as if its particles were free mass-points subject to force f per unit mass. 
The next siruplest case is that when the stress depends linearly on the reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates 4 : From {205.2) it follows at once that e ( z-f) 
must be a constant vector field. Assuming this condition to be satisfied, we use 
{207.2) to reduce the general problern to one in which 
(223.1) 
That is, we are to find the most general linear null stress such that the stress 
vector assumes prescribed values on 6. Now if we write 
(223.2) 
and if we take the origin at the centroid and direct the co-ordinate axes along 
the principal axes of geometrical inertia, we have 
Cpqr = tpq z, = Cpq ,ZS, (unsummed) {223-3) 
1 [1955, 10, § 2]. We do not reproduce his interesting result, because we cannot verify 
his initial formulae ( 11)2, 3 . 
2 [1956, 2]. 3 The same may be said of the convenient German expression .,in geschlossener Form". 4 SIGNORINI [1933, 10, §§ 6-7]. Examples are given in §§ 8-9. 
Sect. 223. Statically determinate problems. 581 
where ~,= J z; dv. Hence in the linear case, the coefficients are determined by I> 
the means and first moments of the stress, and vice-versa. By (223.2), the conditions (223.1} become 
(223 .4) 
The former of these is equivalent to 
(223.5) 
Conversely, if (223.5) and (223.4) 2 are satisfied, the linear stress defined by (223.3) 
and (223.2) will be a null stress such that the stress vector on 6 iss. Thus the 
conditions (223.4} 2 and (223.5), along with the condition e(z -I) =const, constitute necessary and sufficient conditions to be satisfied by the loads in order that 
a linear solution to Cauchy's laws, with a prescribed load on the boundary, may exist. 
In Sect. 208 we have derived a condition that all stress vectors at a point have the same 
magnitude. The hydrostatic special case, t = - p 1 and x = 0, is statically determinate (cf. 
Sect. 208). The corresponding problern for plane stress yields t3= 0 and (t1) 2= (12) 2 and is 
statically determinate even in the non-hydrostatic alternative 1, since t1=-t2 implies 
tl = - t~ in all co-ordinate systems in the plane of stress, so that the equations of equilibrium 
become 
tl,l + ti,2= et1. ~~.1- tl,2= f.!/2. 
with (1-gl2g12) t~= (gllg21-gl2gn) tl+gllg22ti. 
(223.6) 
Statically determinate problems also follow from assumptions regarding the stress 
trajectories. For example, from (209.1) we see that in plane stress with f- x = 0, if one 
family of stress trajectories consists in straight lines, the other principal stress does not 
vary along its trajectories 2 . In this same case, the angle <j> in (App. 6.3) is of course constant 
along the straight trajectories. 
TRUESDELL 3 has found the most general stresses compatible with the contravariant Velocity components given in cylindrical CO-ordinates r, (), Z by 
r=rR(t), 0 = z A (t), .i = z Z (t); (223.7) 
this motion is a simple type of torsion, expansion, and extension of a circular 
cylinder. For the physical components of d we have 
R 0 0 
d = R trA 
z 
By solving (156.5} 2 we obtain 
e = eo S(t), S = exp [- J (2R + Z) dt]. 
The contravariant components of acceleration are 
We restriet attention to stresses such that 
1 THEODORESCO [1937, 9]. 
2 HEYMANS [1924, 4]. 
3 [1955, 28, § 11] 
okm 
871 =0, rz =0, 
(223.8) 
(223.9) 
(223.11) 
582 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 224. 
and we put /==0; the dynamical equations (205A.1), in cylindrical co-ordinates, 
become 
a 
or 
rr + rr -
r ifo = <::O 
n s r [R + R2 - z2 A 2] ' l 
a;{) + aifz + 2 ;o = Sr z[i + A(2R +Z)] or oz r (!o ' I 
an · a-;- = (!o S z [ Z + Z2J . 
(223.12) 
The general solution is 
fTz = - r~ :r (r2 J r7J d z) + ~ (!o r z2 S [ Ä + A (2 R + Z) J + Q, 
- 0 • () () = 7iY (r ,-,) + (!o r 2 S [ z2 A 2 - R - R2J , (223.13) 
1 • 
zz = 2 (!o z2 S [ Z + Z2] + P, 
where P and Q are arbitrary functions of r, t. The terms proportional to (!o 
express the effect of the inertia of the material. 
The most interesting statically determinate problems arise in the theory of 
shells, where a state of membrane stress Ieads to the determined system (212.22), 
(212.23). The general solution of these equations will be developed in Sect. 229. 
IV. General solutions of the equations of motion. 
224. Steady plane problems. So as to make clear the approach to stress functions in general, we begin with the siruplest case, when the motion is steady and 
plane, the stress is plane 1, and the assigned forces satisfy (207.1). Then in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates CAUCHY's first law (205.2) assumes the form 
(txx- ex2 - V), ... + (t..-y- ex:V).r = o, } (224.1) (tyx- e:Vx),x + (tyy- (!Y2- V),y = 0. 
Since each of these formulae is a condition of integrability for a differential form, 
the pair is equivalent to the existence of functions F and G such that 
txx-ex2-V=F.r· t..-y-ex:V=-F,,..} (224.2) 
lyx- (!YX = G,)'' tyy- (!Y2- V=- G,x• 
When the stress is not symmetric, no simplification is possible, but in the nonpolar case, to which this subchapter is restricted, the left-hand sides of (224.2) 2 
and (224.2) 3 are equal, so that 
F,,. + G,y = o. (224.3) 
This, in turn, is a condition of integrability for the existence of a function A 
such that 
F=-A,y, G=A,r (224.4) 
Substitution in (224.2) yields 
txx- ex2 - V=- A.rr• trr- e:Y2 - V=- A,xx• t,.y- exy = A,xr. (224.5) 
When t-(!XX- V 1 is twice continuously differentiable, the theorem on exact 
differentials implies that the existence of a function A satisfying (224.5) is 
1 These results hold also when 1zzoF 0 but lzz z=O, as for example when the stress is a 
hydrostatic pressure independent of z. ' 
Sect. 224. Steady plane problems. 583 
necessary and sufficient that (224.1) hold. Accordingly, (224.5) gives the general 
solution of the equations of motion for the case considered. The function A 
is the celebrated stress function of AIRY1. Our argument, since it rests upon the 
theorem of the exact differential, implies that A is single-valued in simply connected regions, generally multivalued in multiply connected regions 2• 
Since a unit normal to the element of arc i dx + j dy is - i dyfds + j dxfds, 
from (203.4) and (224.5) we obtain the components of the stress vector across 
the arc in the forms 
t (ra)x - (! i. Pn + V !!_t ds -A 
- ,yy !:J'_ ds + A 
,xy !!.!_- ds - dA,y ds ' l 
(224.6) t _ · · _ V dx __ A !_}'-_ _ A dx __ dA,x 
(raJy eYPn ds - ,yx dx ,u ds - ds · 
Therefore the normal stress and shear stress on the element of arc are given by 
t - p'2- V=- dA,y !.!.._- dA,% ~ n (! n ds ds ds ds ' 
__ !____ (A dx + A !_}'-_) + A !____ (dx) + A _!_ (dy) - ds ,x ds ,y ds ,x ds ds ,y ds ds ' 
- - d2A + "(- A !!t + A !!.!_) - ds2 ,x ds ,y ds ' (224.7) 
d2A dA 
= - ds2 + "!in' • • d2A dA 
tt- (! Pn Pt = ds dn + "ds' 
where Pn and Pt are the normal and tangential components of velocity. These 
results are due to MICHELL 3, for the case of equilibrium. If the element is a 
stationary boundary, the momentum transfer vanishes upon it, and (224.7) yields 
the stress vector directly. 
To find the dynamical significance of the intermediate function F, we integrate 
along a curve c from ;x:1 to ;x:2 , obtaining 
Fl:~: Fi:r:1 = f dF = f[(- txy + eiy) dx +(tu- ei2 - V) dy ], l c c (224.8) 
= f[i (tu- ei2 - V) + j (txy- ei:Y)] [i dy-j dx]. 
"' 
If we include the apparent stress due to assigned force and to transfer of momentum, by (203.4) the integrand is the x-component of the stress vector actinc 
upon a cylinder of unit height based upon the curve c. Thus the difference of 
1 AIRY [1863, 1] considered only the case when e:i::i:- V 1 = 0, and he did not prove 
necessity; the generality of the solutionwas asserted by MAXWELL [1870, 4, pp. 192-193]. 
The first fully satisfactory treatment for the case of equilibrium was given by MICHELL 
[1900, 6]; among other things, he included V [ibid., p. 100] and gave an explicit form of 
(224.5) in orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinates [ibid., p. 111]. E.R. NEUMANN [1907, 6, § 1] 
obtained (224.5) for motion in which t is hydrostatic and V=O. Cf. also BRAHTZ [1934, 1], 
BATEMAN [1936, 1, § 2], CRocco [1950, 5]. VorGT [1882, 4, pp. 297-298] remarked that 
(224.1) continues to hold when all components of stress are constant in the z-direction; in 
this case, which is often appropriate to torsion of a cylinder, the z-component of CAucHv's 
first law yields a function W such that ty:- e yz = l~x· t,..- exz =- ~Y· when (V+ ez2),z 
=0. 
2 After making this observation, MrcHELL [1900, 6, p. 103ff.] determined the nature 
of this multi-valuedness for the case of linear elasticity theory. 
a [1900, 6, p. 110]. An incorrect formula of this kindwas given by NEUMANN [1907, 
6, § 3]. 
584 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The C!assical Field Theories. Sect. 225. 
the values F at ;r1 and x 2 equals the x-component of the force 1, including inertial 
force, acting upon c. When c is a stationary boundary, the momentum transfer 
terms contribute nothing to the integral, which then yields the force alone. A 
similar interpretation holds for G. 
To interpret2 the function A, we see that for a curve c connecting x 2 to x 1 
we have 
Alor2 - Alor1 = f dA= f (A,xdx + A," dy) = f (Gdx -F dy), 
" " " 
= (x2- xl) Gior2 - (Y2- YI} Fizz+ 
+ J {(x- x 1} [(t"y- (}'y2 - V) dx- (tx"- eiy) dy J + (224.9) 
" + (y- y1) [(tu- ei2 - V) dy- (tx"- eiy) dx ]}, 
= (xz- xJ} Gior2 - (Y2- YJ} Flor2 + 2 
where 2 is the torque about x 1 exerted by the stress, including the apparent 
stress due to rate of change of momentum and to applied force, acting upon the 
right-hand side of c, thought of as directed from x 1 toward x 2 • 
While we have used reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, the extension of 
(224.5) to arbitrary curvilinear Co-ordinates is immediate 3 : 
tkm- eikim- V gkm =- ekP emq A,pq• (224.10} 
where gkm is the contravariant metric tensor in the plane, ekP is the absolute 
alternating tensor, and "," denotes covariant differentiation based on g. Since 
(224.10} is a tensor equation, and since it reduces to (224.5) when the co-ordinates 
arereetangular Cartesian, it is valid in all co-ordinate systems. 
225. Generalized Iineal motion. Consider a motion in which t, iJ, (!, and V 
all depend only upon x and t. Using (161.22) and the x-component of (205.2), 
we readily infer the existence of a function U such that 4 
o(t;,, L;xl 
U i= _ Z:.:x 1 t =V+ o(x,t)- e = ,XX' L;xx ' XX L;xx • (225.1) 
The second of these equations may be written in the form 
i =- (t;~l,t . (225.2) (L; rl,, ' 
thus the velocity equals the slope of the curve U.x = const in the t-x plane. The 
remaining components of (205.2) yield the existence of functions V and W such 
that 
Z = W xfUxx, 
In the lineal case, V= W = 0. 
(225.3) 
1 This result is due to MAXWELL [1870, 4, pp. 192-193], who considered only the static 
case; he called the vector F, G "the diagram of stress ". His derivation was criticized and 
corrected by MrcHELL [1900, 6, p. 107]. In rediscovering this result for the case of hydrostatic stress, BATEMAN [1938, I, § 1] called Fand G the "drag and Iift functions". 2 PHILLIPS [1934, 4] based his proof of the existence of AIRY's function on this interpretation. Cf. also SoBRERO [1935, 7]. An energetic interpretation for A and for stress functions of all types considered below has been given by L. FINZI [1956, 7, § 6]. 3 B. FINZI [1934, 2, § 1]. 4 The result was worked out by W. KrRCHHOFF [1930, 2, § 1], following a suggestion of 
E.R. NEUMANN [1907, 6, § 6]. It is rediscovered by McVITTIE [1953, 18, § 3]. 
Sects. 226,227. General solution for a flat space. 585 
226. Conventions for the remaining general solutions. All general solutions 
are obtained by essentially the same reasoning as in Sect. 224, although the details 
may be more elaborate. At bottom, we are to integrate1 
skm =0 ,m ' (226.1) 
that is, to find the most general symmetric null stress. It is the additional condition of symmetry that makes the problern interesting and different from that 
solved in Sects. 161 to 164. The variations in the answers from case to case arise 
because of different numbers of dimensions and different metrics on which the 
covariant differentiation is based. 
For the Euclidean case, whatever the number of dimensions, the entire 
analysis consists in repeated use of the fact that a continuously differentiable 
tensor whose divergence vanishes may be expressedas the curl of another tensor. 
The tensor potentials so determined exist subject to various conditions that may 
be found in the literature on the theory of the potential. 
We do not remind the reader again that when all co-ordinates are space Coordinates we may take skm as tkm- exkxm with an additional term -V gkm 
when f satisfies (207.1). For general f, the linearity of CAUCHY's laws enables 
the general solution to be gotten by adding to any particular solution the general 
null stress. 
The problern of finding a particular integral is relatively trivial in a flat space. In a 
convex region, quadratures suffice. More generally, for any Riemannian space, Iet u be 
any solution of the linear differential equation 
(226.2) 
where R::O is the Ricci tensor. Then it is easy to verify that a particular solution pskm of 
the system skm,m+efk=o, skm=smk is given by2 
(226.3) 
We now turn our attention to determining the most generalnull stress 3. 
227. Generalsolution for a flat space. We suppose s tobe twice continuously 
differentiable. In order that skm m = 0 in a flat space of any number of dimensions, 
it is necessary and sufficient tliat there exist a tensor b such that 4 
(227.1) 
The condition skm =smk may now be written in the form 
(bkmP _ bmkP),p = 0. (227.2) 
1 Cf. the treatment of this class of problems by FINZI and PASTORI [1949, 11, Chap. IV, 
§ 7]. 
2 This result is suggested by the special case for flat spaces given by ScHAEFER [1953, 
28, § 5]. 
3 Most of the material in the rest of this subchapter is taken from a work of TRUESDELL 
[1959, 11]. 
' As observed by GWYTHER [1913, 2], for a stress tensor which is not symmetric the 
analysis breaks off at this point. In the more general viewpoint allowing couple stress as weil 
as ordinary stress, all differential conditions of equilibrium are prescriptions of divergences, 
as shown at the end of Sect. 205. Stress functions for the system (205.2}, {205.10) are given 
by GüNTHER [1958, 4, § 3]. 
586 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 227. 
This condition, in turn, is equivalent to the existence of a tensor c such that 
where 
ckmpq = _ ckmq p = _ cmkPq 0 
Therefore 
2bkmP = (cPkmq + cmPqk + ckmPq),q, 
so that (227o1) becomes 
where 
skm = kPkmq ,pq• 
kPkmq = i (cPkmq + cmqPk), } 
kPkmq = _ hkPmq = _ kPkqm = hmqpk 0 
(22703) 
(227.4) 
(227o5) 
(227.6) 
(227o7) 
The foregoing derivation, given by DORN and SCHILD1, shows that (227o6) furnishes the gener•al solution of Cauchy's laws in a flat space of any dimension. 
In the three-dimensional case, set 
a - 1 e e hPkmq rs = 4 rpk sqm • 
so that 
hPkmq = ekrp emsq a, 50 a,. = a.,. 
Then (227.6) becomes the Gwyther-Finzi general solution2 : 
skm = ekrp emsq a,s,pq. 
(227o8) 
(227.9) 
(227o10) 
B. FINZI noticed that the tensor a is indeterminate 3 to within an arbitrary 
symmetric tensor· a0 satisfying ekrp emsq a~s,pq =0. As we have mentioned in 
1 [1956, 4]. The basic idea was suggested by BELTRAMI [1892, 2]. Cf. also MORERA 
[1892, 10]. 
A variant ofthis derivation had been given earlier by GüNTHER [1954. 8, § 1]. He begins 
by introducing the skew-symmetric dual tensor of fourth order, 
1/.mpq = Bkmn Bpqs T"s' (*) 
which he interprets as a "transversal stress tensor". An explicit solution for 1/.mpq in terms 
of stress functions is simply obtained. In DoRN and ScHILD's proof, the duals appear in 
(227.8)0 While GüNTHER's solution for the dual tensor is indeed valid, as he says, in a flat 
space of any dimension, to derive from it the ordinary stress tensor we must use the inverse 
of (*) and hence presume the nurober of dimensions to be three. Of course GüNTHER's proof 
can ·be adjusted to the n-dimensional case also, but DoRN and ScHILD's proof is equally 
simple and natural in all cases. 2 While the Cartesian tensor form of (227.10) is almost obvious from an equation of 
KLEIN and WIEGHARDT [1905, 3, Eq. (33)], they did not infer it. GWYTHER [1912, 3] 
obtained (227.10) in orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinates, writing out the special cases appropriate to reetangular Cartesian, cylindrical polar, and spherical polar co-ordinates (cf. also 
[ 1911, 5]). His steps are such as to imply the necessity of the result; the sufficiency is immediate. B. FINZI [1934, 2, § 3] observed that (227.10) yields a symmetric tensor satisfying 
skm ". = 0; for a proof of completeness he was content to refer to the previously known fact 
that the special cases (227.12) and (227.13) are complete. While KRÖNER [1954, 11, § 1] does 
not prove completeness, he begins from an invariant decomposition of symmetric tensors 
that might be made the basis of a rigorous proof. 3 This fact is used by PERETTI [1949. 23] to show that it is possible to choose a in such 
a way that from its components may be obtained simple expressions for the resultant force 
and moment of the stresses on a surface. Cf. also BLOKH [1950, 2]. GüNTHER [1954. 8, § 3] 
gives simple expressions for the resultant force and torque on a body in terms of integrals of 
stress functions around particular curves. ScHAEFER [1955. 22] discusses the nature of 
null stress on this basis. In a later work, SCHAEFER [1959. 10] interprets the components 
of a as dynamical actions upon the bounding surface, conceived as being that of a plate and 
of a slab simultaneously. 
Sect. 228. Two applications: rotationally symmetric case, and plane unsteady motion. 587 
Sects. 34 and 84, such a tensor is of the form a~, = b(m,r)• where bis an arbitrary 
veetor. For a given a, in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates we may choose b 
so as to satisfy one or the other of the conditions 
b(m,r) = - amr> 
bm,m =- amm 
r=f=m } 
(unsummed). (227.11) 
These two choices of b show that for reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates there 
is no loss in generality in assuming in the first place that a is diagonal, or that 
the diagonal components of a are zero. The former alternative yields 
etc. (227.12) 
with a1 a,."'"' a3 = aYY, a3- az z; the latter alternative yields 
(227.13) 
with a4 a23 , a5- a31 , a6- a12 • These two forms of the general solution were 
obtained by MAXWELL and MoRERA1, respectively. As follows from the special 
choices of a made to derive them, these special forms are not invariant under 
transformations even of reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates. The explicit form 
for (227.10) in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, with no restrietions on the 
six potentials, may be obtained by adding together the right-hand sides of (227.12) 
and (227.13). Other special choices of the potentials are possible 2, but it by no 
means follows that a solution obtained by imposing three arbitrary conditions 
on the six potentials akm remains complete 3 • 
An attempt to adjust the stress funetions so as to satisfy the stress boundary 
condition (203.6) 1 on a reetangular parallelepiped has been m.ade by FILONBNKOBoRODICH4. 
228. Two applications: the rotationally symmetric case, and plane unsteady 
motion. If we write (227.1 0) explicitly in cylindrical polar co-ordinates, at the same 
time supposing that all derivatives with respect to the azimuthangle are zero, we 
1 [1868, 12], [1870, 4]; [1892, 9]. Using results given by BELTRAMI [1892, 2], MaRERA 
[ 1892, 10] modified his derivation so as to yield (227 .12) alternatively to (227 .13). Cf. also 
GwYTHER [1913, 2]. A Iiterature devoted mainly to rediscovery of known results regarding 
this subject has arisen recently; cf. KuzMIN [ 194 5, 3], WEBER [ 1948, 38], MaRINAGA and 
NöNa [1950, 19], ScHARFER [1953, 28], LANGHAAR and STIPPES [1954, 12], ÜRNSTEIN [1954, 
16]. 2 Cf. MaRINAGA and NöNa [1950, 19, § 3]. BLOKH [1950, 2] lists the essentially different 
forms which result from such special choices: 5 in reetangular Cartesian Co-ordinates, 20 in 
general co-ordinates, 18 in cylindrical co-ordinates, 10 in cylindrical Co-ordinates for rotationally symmetric problems, 19 in spherical Co-ordinates. 3 What reductions are possible is not obvious. In writings on stress functions there is a 
deplorable custom of inferring completeness by merely counting the number of arbitrary 
functions. Apart from the logical gap in such inference, its danger is illustrated by the solution written down without proof of completeness by PRATELLI [1953, 25, § 1]: 
(A) 
While indeed a solution for any choice of the three arbitrary potentials F, H, K, it is not 
general. In fact, by using the expression for the product skpq smrs as a determinant of t5~'s, 
we may put (A) into the form 
5km= p.q,qgkm_ p,km, (B) 
where P ~F- H + K, and it is easy to exhibit solutions of skm m = 0 which cannot be expressed in the form (B). ' 
4 [ 19 51, 7 and 8] [ 19 57, 4]. The work rests on trigonometric series or special functional 
forms. 
588 
obtain1 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
--8+13 25 rr-a,. -a,--a,, r 1' ' r , 
- 8 2 8 1 1 zz=a"+-a,--a" ' r ' r , 
rz=- a -j--a --a - [ ll 1 8 1 1] •' r r ,z' 
0-- 4 1 4 1 4 6 + 2 z--a"--a,+- 6 2 a +a., -a., • r ' r ' r • 
Sect. 228. 
(228.1) 
where commas denote partial derivatives, and where we have set a1 = a,,, 
a8=a66fr 2, a3=a .. , a4=a61fr, a5=a," a6=a,6fr. The potentials a1, a8, a3, and 
a5 occur only in the first four members of Eq. (228.1); the potentials a4 and a6 , 
only in the last two. Rotationally symmetric stress distributions in which rO = 0, 
Oz = 0 are often called torsionless; the most general stress of this kind is obtained 
by setting a4 = 0, a6 = 0 in (228.1). In any case, the six potentials may be reduced 
to three in a variety of ways 2• For example, if we set 
L = a8 + __1_ a8 - __1_ a1 ) ,r •' r r ' 
M =a,.+-a,--a,- - 8 1 .~ 2 5 L .,, , r ' r ' , .. 
(228.2) 
then the first four members of (228.1} become 3 
;"Y =L, .. +M, Oo = (rM),,+L,..,) 
- 1 - zz=L"+-L,, rz=-L", , " . ' 
(228.)) 
furnishing the generat solution for torsionless rotationally symmetric stress. Similarly, 
if we put 
(228.4) 
the last two members of (228.1} become 4 
- 1 rO=----.-W,, r• • 
- 1 0z=-2 W,, r ' (228.5) 
fumishing the generat solution for purely torsional stress. 
A more interesting application, resting upon a device to be used more strikingly in Sect. 229, begins with the observation that in the case of plane motion, 
1 BRDil:KA [1957. 2, § 6]. A more symmetrical expression is given by MARGUERRE [1955. 
16], but his potentials are connected by a condition of compatibility, and there is no proof 
of completeness. 
2 Cf. the work of BLOKH [1950, 2]. 
3 This solution, whose completeness is easy to prove also directly from the equations of 
equilibrium, was obtained by LovE [1906, 5, § 188]. Variants are given by BRDil:KA [1957. 
2, § 4]. 
' This isanother form of the solution of VoiGT mentioned in footnote 1, p. 583. Cf. also 
MICHELL (1900, 7, p. 133], PHILLIPS [1934, 4]. 
Sect. 229. Stress functions for membranes. 589 
Eqs. (211.5} with F=O are of the form skm,m=O in a flat space of three 
dimensions with reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates x, y, t. Restriding attention 
to these special Co-ordinates, we apply the solution (227.10). After time differentiations and time components are written explicitly, the result turns out 
to be in tensorial form under transformation of general Co-ordinates in the plane: 
) (228.6) 
where a prime denotes 8j8t and where the range of indices is 1, 2. In the steady 
case, this reduces to Amv's solution (224.10} with A =-a33 . The six potentials 
may be reduced to three in various ways. For example, if we choose a to be 
diagonal in a particular reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system, we obtain 1 
- (! = a~yy + a~:w (!X= a~xt• (!Y= a~yt• ) 
·2- A 2 ·2 _ A 1 txx=(!~.--=_- ,yy+a,tt• tyy-(!Y -- ,xx+a,tt> 
(,~, (!XY-A,xy• 
(228.7} 
generalizing Amv's solution to the case of arbitrary plane motion. 
229. Stress functions for membranes. From the result at the end of Sect. 212, 
the problern of equilibrium of a membrane leads to a system of the form (226.1); 
explicitly, we are to find the most general symmetric tensor s~ ~ satisfying 
os~~ { ~ } M { .; } 6A _ Tue-+ ;..; s + ;..; s -o, (229.1) 
where the {;.~.;} are Christofiel symbols based on the positive definite surface 
metric tensor a6 ;, and the range of indices is 1, 2. 
There have been several attacks upon this intrinsic problem, which turns 
out to be more difficult than those considered in the preceding sections because 
forcurvedspaces an analogue of STOKES's representation (App. 32.9) of a solenoidal 
field, which yields (227.1) in a Euclidean space of arbitrary dimension, is not 
known. A different approach is needed. STORCH! 2 has obtained a solution in 
geodesie co-ordinates by a direct and laborious reduction. At the present writing, 
a general invariant solution is not yet known, but we present what results are 
available. 
The similarity in form between the conditions of compatibility (84.3} and 
the general solution (227.10} has been remarked for half a century. This simi1 A similar but not obviously identical solution is obtained by KILCHEVSKI [1953, 14]. 
2 [1950, 28]. 
STORCH! [1950, 27] observed that if for an arbitrary surface we choose co-ordinates 
x, y so that ds2 =). (dx2 + dy2), then a solution is furnished by the formulae ).2sxx = o2Afcy2, 
).2sxY = ).2sY"' = - o2Afoxoy, ).2sYY = ()2Afox2, provided 82 Afox2 + 82 Afoy2 = o. For such 
solutions the mean pressure vanishes: Ä(s"'"'+sYY)=s~=O, but it is not shown that all 
solutions such that s~ = 0 are included. 
STORCH! treated the case of a surface of revolution in [1949, 28]; in [1952, 18] [1953, 29], 
the case when a general solution involving derivatives of orders no higher than the fourth 
is possible. Cf. the counterpart expressed in terms of the conditions of compatibility which 
we have mentioned in Sect. 84. A solution for minimal surfaces is initiated by CoLONNETTI 
[1956, 3]. We do not discuss the older solutions for special cases defined by conditions of 
in extensi bility. 
For Riemannian spaces of 2, 3, and 4 dimensions, a special solution containing an arbitrary function of the total curvature is obtained by STORCH! [1957, 13]. 
590 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 229. 
larity may be used to yield a direct solution1 of (226.1) based upon the classical 
principle of virtual work. While that principle will be developed in Sect. 232, 
here we need only a special case which may be verified at once, namely, that s 
satisfies (226.1) if and only if 
f skmd dv-O km - (229.2) 
" 
for all fields d suchthat dkm= c(k,m) for some vector c vanishing upon the boundary. 
Here, as henceforth in this section, we systematically neglect surface integrals 
as having no effect on the differential equations we seek; then the condition 
(229.2) follows at once from GREEN's transformation and hence is valid in any 
space where covariant differentiation is defined. Now suppose the conditions 
of compatibility (Sect. 84) for the system dkm=c(k,m) have the explicit form 
0 _ kmd + ßkmrd + kmrsd + S:kmrstd + -(X km km,r Y km,rs U km,rst · · ·' (229-3) 
where the tensors IX, ß, ... , are symmetric in the first two indices. Introducing 
a multiplier A, we replace (229.2) by 
J [skmdkm- A (1Xkmdkm + ßkmr dkm,r + .. ·)] dv = 0' 
" 
where the variation of d is now unrestricted. Equivalently, 
J[skm_IXkmA +(ßkmrA),,- ···]dkmdv =0. 
Hence for any s satisfying (226.1) there exists a function A such that 
skm = IXkm A - (ßkmr A),, + (ykmrs A),,.- .... 
(229.4) 
(229.5) 
(229.6) 
In this general solution, the stress function A appears as a multiplier for the 
constant expressing the compatibility of the field d with virtual displacements 
in the space considered. 
To apply to the two-dimensional case the local result obtained, consider first 
a surface of constant Gaussian curvature K. By comparing (229. 3) with {84.13) 
we have 
(229.7) 
Substitution into (229.6) yields the generat solution for surfaces of constant curvature 2 : 
s60 = e6a eO'~' A,aq; + KA a60 . (229.8) 
Second, consider a surface applicable upon a surface of revolution. By comparing 
(229.3) with (84.15) we have 
IX6E = K,AK,Aa6E + K·6 K·"' ß6Ea=KK•aa6<, } 
b6EarpVJ =- ea (6 e<>'P K·"'. (229.9) 
1 Given by TRUESDELL [1957, 17], revising work of L. FrNzr tobe described in Sect.224. 
Earlier ScHARFER [1953, 28, § 4] had introduced multip!iers in just the same way, concluding 
that "Jeder Verträglichkeitsbedingung ist eine Spannungsfunktion zugeordnet", but his 
presentation employs results of a kind valid only in flat spaces, and he did not mention any 
further possibilities. GüNTHER [1954. 8, § 2] had in effect noted the method and had remarked 
that the tensor of stress functions in a three-dimensional flat space may be interpreted as 
Lagrangean multipliers expressing the reactions agairrst the geometrical constraints but had 
concluded that "no new point of view results". 2 B. FrNzr [1934. 2, § 2] verified that (229.8) satisfies (226.1) when K is constant but did 
not prove the completeness of this solution; his result is rediscovered by LANGHAAR [1953. 15]. 
B. FINZI [1934, 2, §§ 4, 7] conjectured also corresponding general solutions for spaces of three 
and four dimensions with constant curvature; TRUESDELL [1959, 11, § 12] establishes their 
completeness by this method. 
Sect. 229. Stress functions for membranes. 591 
Substitution into (229.6) yields the generat solution for a surface applicable ttpon 
a surface of revolution of non-constant curvature 1 : 
s ,A ,Aa<p 60 = [-KK·"'a6<+K· 6K·e+e"(6 e<l"'K'P JA+ ) 
+ [- K K·"'a6< + e"(6 e<l'P K·"' + 2e"'(6 eö)q> K·"' JA + (229.10) ·"'" ,q>lp ,;. 
+ [2e"'(6 e<lw K•" + e"(6 e<JI. K•Y] A + e"<6 &l"' K·'P A . ,'P )Y ,Äa ,Aaq; 
If a condition of compatibility of the form (229.3) were available for a general surface, 
we should be able to write down the general solution of (229.1) in terms of a single stress 
function. Since STORCH! obtained such a solution, in geodesie co-ordinates, we know that 
a condition of compatibility of the form (229.3) exists and involves derivatives of d up to 
the fifth order; however, the result cited at the end of Sect. 84 is a system of three equations 
of fourth order, connected by two identities. By ingenious formal devices, GRAIFF 2 has 
exhibited a general tensorial solution in terms of derivatives of order up to 4 of two arbitrary 
scalar functions. She has inferred also that one of the two may always be set equal to zero, 
but in order to justify this inference, it would be necessary to investigate the conditions of 
solubility of certain differential equations occurring in her work. 
In spaces of dimension greater than two, the conditions of compatibility will 
be tensorial rather than scalar equations. For a space of three dimensions, 
tensors rt.uvkm, ßuvkmr, ... , replace the tensors rt.km, ßkmr, ... , in (229.3). In place 
of a scalar multiplier A we then have a tensor Auv in (229.4), and hence also in 
(229.6). The reader may easily verify 3 that use of (84.3) thus yields the solution 
(227.10). In the general case, if the conditions of compatibility have the form 
L(d) = 0 (229.10a) 
where L is a symmetric tensorial linear differential operator, then the general 
solution of (226.1) is 
s = L(A), (229.10b) 
where I is the operator adjoint to L. 
When the solution of (229.1) is known, we may solve (212.22) 1 by quadratures; 
substitution of the result into (212.22) 2 then yields a single linear differential 
equation, of fifth order in the general case, to be satisfied by the single stress 
function. 
A different approach was presented by Pu eHER 4; we now follow a formal 
derivation of his result by L. FINzr 5. The essential differences from the foregoing 
are two-fold. (1) both of the Eqs. (212.22) are used from the start, so that the 
purely intrinsic problern is never solved, and {2) special co-ordinates are employed, 
yielding an extraordinarily simple result of the same form as Amv's solution 
(224.5), except that in general the stress function must satisfy a linear differential 
equation of second order. The first step is to replace s by a corresponding tensor 
density, 
w6ö- va s6<, 
so that (212.22)1 assumes the form 
ow ~ { b } ;.; 6 _ ott< + ,t~ w + ya F - 0 · 
(229.11) 
(229.12) 
1 Given in geodesie co-ordinates, with a proof of completeness, by STORCHr; in the above 
form, with an imperfect proof of completeness, by L. FrNzr. 
2 [1959, 5, §§ 4 to 5]. 3 Also, using the tensorial conditions of compatibility for a general two-dimensional 
surface, by this method we may obtain a general solution of (229.1) expressed in terms of 
fourth derivatives of a tensor Auv• but, as mentioned above, the ultimate solution should 
rather be expressed in terms of fifth derivatives of a single stress function. 
4 [1934, 5] [1939. 12]. 6 [1955. 9]. 
592 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 230. 
Let a reetangular Cartesian equation of \1 be z=z(x, y), and on ll itself choose 
x and y as curvilinear Co-ordinates; this amounts to referring ll to special coordinate curves so chosen that their projection upon some plane is a reetangular 
Cartesian net. In these co-ordinates, which we write as xd, we have 
(229.13) 
where the comma now indicates a partial derivative. Eq. (212.22) 2 thus assumes 
the form 
(229.14) 
where l'x, F'y, F. are the reetangular Cartesian components of the surface load F. 
Putting (229.13) and (229.14) into (229.12) yields after some manipulation1 
wll +w12 +VIiF =O w2I +w22 +1/(ip =0. ,x ,y x ' ,x ,y Y"" y (229.15) 
Since this result is of the same form as (224.1), with more general F but with 
exx = 0, by (224.5) we read off the general solution 
w11=-P -JllaFdx w22=-P -JVaFdy w12=w21=P (22916) ,yy V"" x ' ,xx y ' ,xy• • 
Substituting these results into (229.14) yields 
,u ,yy ,yy •"'" __ ,xy ,xy _ (229.17) z P +z P - 2z P } 
=-z,u J va l'xdx- z,yy J va F_. dy- Vfi(l'xz," +F;z,y- F.). 
This is Pucher's general solution. When the membrane is a plane, Eq. (229.17) 
for PucHER's function is satisfied automatically, and comparison with (224.5) 
shows that PucHER's solution reduces to AIRY's. 
In the special case when 6 is a surface of revolution with meridian z = z (r) in an azimuthal 
plane (} = const, PucHER obtained the specialization 2 
w(rr) = - - 1 - [___!__ P 00 + _1_ P + A]. 
coscp r2 • r •' 
w(OO)= -coscp[~rr+BJ, 
w(r O) = [_1_ ~o] , r , r 
(229.18) 
z" ( 1 ) z' , z' - -P00 +P +-P =Z-(Az) --A, 'Y 'Y J ,r t' ,rr ,r r 
where 
tancp=z', rA = j[R+ + J 0rd0]rdr, B= Jerao. (229.19) 
R, 0 and Z being the physical components of F. 
230. General solution for unsteady motion in three dimensions. For a flat 
space of n dimensions, we have the solution .(227.6), whose completeness was 
established in Sect. 227. When n = 4, letting Greek capital indices have the 
range 1, 2, 3, 4, we may put 
so that 
(230.1) 
(230.2) 
1 Note that F" = alc! Fx + a26 1-;. + (al6 z, .. + a2c! z, y) F.· 2 Further properties of t)le function P and of Eq. (229.17) have been worked out by 
PuCHER [1939, 12] and L. FINZI [1955, 9]. 
Sect. 230. General solution for unsteady motion in three dimensions. 593 
From (227.6) it follows thatl 
srA = erAI!f> eA S'F!J Ax." 'PD, A s' 
where (227.7) imply the following conditions of symmetry for A: 
Al:." 'PD=- A."l:'F!J =- Ax."D'F• A Idl'FD = A 'FDI!f>. (230.4) 
Inspection of (230. 3) shows that only the second of these sets of symmetry conditions is essential; the first set may be abandoned without impairing the solution. The tensor Ais indeterminate to within a tensor A 0 suchthat 
erA Elf> eA S'FD A'l-."'FD, A x = 0. 
The mostgeneralsuch tensorisalinear combination of tensors of the type B Idl 'I', D; 
to satisfy the essential symmetry condition (230.4)8 , we may choose Bx."'F D + 
B'FDI,."; if, finally, we wish to satisfy also the condition (230.4)1, 2 , we have 
A~'dl'F!J: 4B[Idl]['l',!J] + 4B['FS}][I,dl]• l - B l:dl'F, !J- B Edl!J, 'I'- B."l:'F,!J + B."l:!J, 'I'+ 
+ B'l'Dl.',."- B'F!Jdl,E- Bu'Fx,<~> + BD'Fdl,x· 
(230.5) 
Since classical space-time need not be regarded as a flat tour-dimensional 
space, these formulae do not necessarily have invariant significance for it (but 
cf. Sect. 153). However, in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates in an inertial frame 
(211.5) with F=O do reduce to the form 
yrA,A = 0, yrA = pr, (230.6) 
For these special co-ordinates, then, the solution (230.3) is general. In this 
solution, we may write time differentiations and time components explicitly. 
The resulting formulae, derived in reetangular co-ordinates, turn out to be of 
tensorial form under transformations of the space co-ordinates alone. These 
formulae, valid for all curvilinear co-ordinate systemsinan inertial frame, are 2 : 
- (! = s'' = e•mnePqr Amnqr,sp• ) 
_ nxk = 5k4 = _ 6ksmePq•(A' + 2A ) o: smqr,p 4mqr,sp (230.7) 
tkm _ exk ,im= 5km = 4ekPq emsn A,p,s, qn + 
+2(ekPqem•"+eksnemPq)A' + ekPqem•nA" 4npq,s pqsn• 
1 B. FINZI [1934, 2, § 5] wrote down (230.3) and symmetry conditions consisting in 
(230.4) and a further requirement which we do not verify; he was content to infer completeness 
by counting the number of assignable arbitrary functions. A somewhat involved proof was 
given by MaRINAGA and NöNo [1950, 19, § 4]; we do not follow the argument whereby they 
claim [ibid., § 5] to establish the alternative form 
sl'Lf = el'Adl'FeASI'l'Adls,A:I:; 
they give corresponding results in n dimensions. 
2 B. FINZI [ 1934, 2, § 6]. In reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, this result is rediscovered 
by ARZHANIKH [1952, 1] (while he uses 21 potentials, obviously one may be eliminated). 
KILCHEVSKI [1953,' 14] observes that if RrA is the contracted Riemann tensor based on the 
Riemannian metric tensor G l'A, then in any Riemannian 4-space the quantities TrA == RrA -
tGrA R"'." satisfy TrA A = o. Putting GrA = drA + eHrA, he calculates TrA = eQrA+O(e2); 
hence follows öQFAfo~A = o, so that Ql'Lf, in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, gives a 
solution of the type presented in the text above. A similar approach, involving a detour 
through relativity theory, is presented by McVITTIE [1953, 18, § 2]; that his solution is 
not general is remarked by WHITHAM [1954, 26], who obtains what appears tobe a special 
case of FINZI's solution in a special co-ordinate system. Rediscoveries of Gther special -cases 
are made by MILNE-THOMSON [1957, 9] and by BLANKFIELD and McVITTIE [1959, 1 and 2). 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 3 8 
594 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 231. 
where primes denote ofot, and where the symmetries of the tensors Apqmn• A 411 Pq• 
and A4 p4 q may be read off from (230.4). This is Finzi's general solution of 
the equations of balance of mass and momentum in an inertial frame. In the 
case of equilibrium, this solution reduces to (227.10) with 4A4 p4m=apm· 
In a particular co-ordinate system, by means of (230.5) we may impose 14 conditions 
upon the 20 independent potentials occurring in the solution (230.7). For example, we are 
tempted to take A,p"'' as diagonal, A 4mqr as zero, and Amnqr as zero when m =!= q andn =!= r. 
We have been unable to prove that it is possible to choose Hin (230.5) in such a way as to 
justifythis special choice of A; if it is legitimate, then, writing A 1 = 4A4141 , ••. , A 4 = 2A 2323 , ... , 
in this case we reduce (230.3) to the form 
- e = A~:u + A~yy + A:.,, ei = A~xt .... , } 
Iu- ei 2= A~u+ A:yy+ A~tt • ... , lxy- exy=- A~xy • ... , (230.8) 
extending MAXWELL's formulae (227.12) so as to yield a simple yet general solution in terms 
of six potentials. 
When the field theories were discovered in the eighteenth century, solutions 
in arbitrary functions such as those presented in this subchapter were sought 
eamestly, but, for the most part, sought in vain. In the nineteenth century, 
researches on partial differential equations tumed away from such general 
solutions so as to concentrate upon boundary-value problems. When, in the 
twentieth century, the general solutions were at last obtained, scarce attention 
was paid to them, and to this day they remain virtually unknown. Though 
so far they have been used but rarely, they might turn out to be illuminating 
in .studies of underdetermined systems, where the conventional viewpoint of 
partial differential equations has gained little. 
V. Variational principles. 
231. On the qualities of variational principles. In favor of variational principles as expressions of physicallaws it is commonly alleged1 : 
1. They are statements about a system as a whole, rather than the parts 
that it comprises. 
2. Since they refer to the extremum of a scalar, they are invariant, and may 
be used to derive the special forms appropriate to any particular description. 
3. They imply boundary conditions and jump conditions as well as differential 
equations. 
4. They automatically include the effects of constraints, without requiring 
that the corresponding reactions be known. 
5. They have heuristic value for suggesting generalizations 2• 
No. 2 is outmoded, now that the principles of tensor analysis offer usasimpler 
and more direct method, used throughout this treatise, for obtaining invariant 
statements. No. 3 is shared by the direct statement of physical laws in integral 
form as equations of balance 3, as shown by the development of continuum mechanics given earlier in this chapter (cf. especially Sects. 203 and 205). Moreover, 
the boundary conditions ernerging from a variational principle depend upon 
what boundary integrals, if any, are included in the statement of the principle, 
and the selection of these boundary integrals is not always dictated by the 
physical idea which the variational principle is assumed to express. No. 4 is a 
somewhat dubious blessing, since only a special kind of constraints is included 
1 Cf. HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 1], who speaks of "the pregnant brevity". 1 A sixth, the use of direct variational methods to calculate or prove existence of solutions, 
may.be added in cases where a determinate system is considered but in the present treatise, 
devoted to underdetermined systems, is not relevant. 
a Cf. footnote 4, p. 232. 
Sect. 232. Virtual work and the Lagrange-D' Alembert principle. 595 
in each case, namely, those constraints having no effect on the quantity being 
varied. In mechanics, these are typically constraints which do no work. Not 
all constraints are of this kind, and for those which are not, the variational approach requires as direct a statement as does any other. No. 5, while having 
a basis in the physics of this century, is largely an expression of taste. 
There remains only No. 1, along with the elegance that variational principles 
sometimes exhibit. Both these are reduced if not annulled when the variational 
principle itself is awkward of unnatural. This is usually the case in continuum 
mechanics. The lines of thought which have led to beautiful variational Statements for systems of mass-points have been applied in continuum mechanics 
also, but only rarely are the results beautiful or useful. 
For completeness, we now present variational principles and related topics, 
but we regard them as derivative and subservient to the principles of mechanics 
already developed. In particular, no variational principle has ever been shown to 
yield Cauchy's fundamental theorem (203.4) in its basic sense as asserting that 
existence of the stress vector implies the existence of the stress tensor1 . For 
the statements henceforth we take the stress tensor rather than the stress vector 
as given. Our purpose, in each case, is to learn the role of the effective force of 
the stress, tkm,m, in modifying the classical theorems concerning mass-points 2 • 
Our presentation concerns solely the formal problern 3 of setting up expressions 
such that the vanishing of their first variation is equivalent to CAUCHY's laws. 
Analytical questions and, except in Sect. 23 5, the existence of minima are not 
discussed. 
232. Virtual work and the Lagrange-D' Alembert principle. The principle of 
virtual work, which when the reaction of inertia is included may be called the 
Lagrange-D'Alembert prin,ciple, is the oldest general variational form of the equations of mechanics. We begirr by following but extending the traditional 
development 4 of the principle. Some variants are presented afterward. 
Corresponding to a sequence of independent variations ~xk, ~xkm• ~xkmp• ... , 
that is, a set of arbitrary covariant fields, we define the virtual work done on a 
1 The derivation given by HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 3a] fails through petitio principi, since 
the stress components appear in the original variational principle. We do not understand 
the remark attributed to CARATHEODORY by MüLLER and TrMPE [1906, 6, footnote 32]. 
Existence of the stress tensor can be proved from variational principles which assume the 
existence of an internal energy having a special functional form. Such results are presented 
in Sects. 232 A, 236, and 262. 
2 It is possible simply to transcribe the theorems for systems of mass-points, written as 
Stieltjes integrals over material volumes, and then add tkm, m to the contravariant force vector. 
Cf. EICHENWALD [1939, 7]. 
a We do not attempt to discuss variational principles from the axiomatic or conceptual 
standpoint. For the difficult question of the contrast between the momentum principle 
and the Lagrange-D'Alembert principle, cf. HAMEL [1908, 4, Kap. 2, §§ 1, 3]. 
4 HAUGHTON [1855, 2, pp. 99-100], KIRCHHOFF [1876, 2, Eilfte Vorlesung, § 5], BELTRAM! [1881, J, pp. 385-388], HELLINGER [1914, 4, §§ 3a-b]. A variant, bringing in explicitly the dependence of general curvilinear Co-ordinates on reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, was given by MoRERA [1885, 6, § 1]. We do not Iist the many sources that formulate 
a principle of virtual work for special systems such as rods or membranes, nor do we trace 
the origin of the principle for continuous media in general through the studies of LAGRANGE on 
perfect fluids, of GREEN and KELVIN on elastic bodies. Thc firsttreatmentvalid for general 
continua isthat of ProLA (1833), tobe given below. The "general formula" of LAGRANGE 
[1788, J, Seconde Partie, Seconde Sect., ~ 7] is valid only for systems of mass-points and 
certain other special systems. For D' ALEMBERT's principle, see above, p. 532, footnote 1. 
All the foregoing references concern only the classical case, where the terms in Oxkm• 
oxkmp, ... , are absent from (232.1). The general theory given here is suggested by an intermediate case due to HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 4b]. 
38* 
596 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classica] Field Theories. 
body "f/ as the linear form 1 
~ = j [sk~xk + skm~xkm + skmP ~xkmp + .. ·]da+ I 
+ J {e [jk ~xk + fk"' ~X km+ fkmP ~Xkmp + · · ·] - r 
- [tkm ~xk,m + tkmp ~Xkm,p + .. ·]} dv. 
The quantities sk, skm, ... ,er. efkm, ... , tkm, tkmP, ... are defined simply 
coefficients of the form. By GREEN's transformation follows 
~ = p [(sk- tkmn") ~xk + (skm_ tkmPnp) ~Xkm +···]da+ ) 
+ j [(e fk + tk"',m) ~Xk + ((> fk"' + tkmP,p) ~X km+···] dv · 
The principle of virtual work is the assertion 
f (> [xk t5xk + ixmt5xkm +pkpmf:P Oxkmp + · · ·J dv = ~. r 
Sect. 232 
(232.1) 
as the 
(232.2) 
(232-3) 
p being, as usual, the position vector from an arbitrary origin. Eq. (232.3) 
is to hold for all variations consistent with the constraints. For the time being, 
we leave aside the effect of constraints and assume that the virtual fields may 
be varied arbitrarily, Then, by (232.2), the principle of virtual work is equivalent2 
to the system (205 .19), with boundary conditions sk = tkm nm, etc. 
The classical special case of (232.3) is 
Jexkoxk=~ pskoxkda + f[efkoxk-tkm()xk,m]dv. (232.4) 
r f/' r 
This special case, for unconstrained variations, is equivalent to CAUCHY's first 
law (205.2). 
We now consider some alternative variational formulations for one or both 
of CAUCHY'S laws. 
If we restriet the variations considered, we may avoid using the stress components directly in the principle of virtual work. Set 
)ffi - p sk oxk da +Je jk oxk dv. (232.5) 
f/' r 
The theorem oj Piola 3 asserts that the condition 
Je xk ~xk dv = )ffi (232.6) 
r 
1 Here and the sequel we set o:rk m == (o:rk) .,., etc. 
2 For the non-polar case, PIOLA [1848, 2, '1[48] and HELLINGER [1914, 4, §3d] provcd the 
equivalence by adjusting the variations so that (232.2) reduces to (200.1). We prefcr the simpler argument (232.3) ~ (205.19) ~ (205.20). The result we have established showsalso that 
the common claim that symmetry of the stress tensor does not follow from the principle 
of virtual work is misleading. lndeed, it does not follow naturally. The principle must be 
adjusted so as to imply that the virtual work of the torques is exactly the virtual work of the 
moments of corresponding forces. As follows from (205.21), this may be done by adding 
a priori the assumption that the coefficients in (232.1) satisfy t[km]p =P[k tm]P• i[kp] =P[k /p], 
and only skew-symmetric o:rkm need be considered. 
3 The pioneer work of PIDLA [1833, 3] [1848, 2, '\['\[ 34-38, 46- 50] is somewhat involved. 
-1 
First, PIOLA used the material variables, and his condition ofrigidityis oC KM =0 or oCKM = 0, 
so that the outcome is (210.8) or (210.10) rather than (205.2); (205.11) and (205.2) are then 
proved by transformation. Second, he seemed Ioth to confess that his principle employed 
rigid virtual displacements; instead, he claimed to establish it first for rigid bodies only. In 
the former work, he promised to remove the restriction in a later memoir; in the latter, he 
claimed to do so by use of an intermediate reference state. He was also the first to derive the 
stress boundary conditions from a variational principle [1848, 2, '\[52], and he formulated 
an analogaus variational principle for onc-dimensional and two-dimensional systems [1848, 
2, Chap. VII]. 
Sect. 232. Virtual work and the Lagrange-D'Alembert principle. 597 
for virtual translations is equivalent to Cauchy's first law (205.2); for rigid virtual 
displacements, to Cauchy's second law (205.11) as well. In these statements, a 
virtual translation is a field (Jx suchthat bxk.m =0, while a rigid virtual displacement is a field (Jx suchthat (Jx(k,m)=O. To prove ProLA's theorem we first set up 
the nine side conditions (Jxk m=O, and we write -tkm for the corresponding 
multipliers1• Then (232.6) is 'equivalent to 
f (! 3(k (Jxk d V = ~ sk (Jxk da+ .r ((! jk (j Xk- tkm (Jxk, m) dv (232.7) 
j' Y' j' 
for arbitrary variations bx. By applying GREEN's transformation, we derive 
both (203.6) and (205.2); conversely, these latter imply (232.6). To derive the 
second statement in PIOLA's theorem, we set up the six side conditions (j x<k, m) = 0, 
corresponding to which there is a symmetric tensor of multipliers, - tkm, and 
the proof proceeds as before. 
An elegant modification of ProLA's theorem, not using multipliers but again 
introducing the stresses as coefficients, is due to MuRNAGHAN 2• In (232.5) we 
add terms representing the virtual work of the assigned couples, and then we add 
and subtract terms containing t and m: 
m3 =::== ~ [sk(Jxk·- skP(jxk,p] da+ f e[ikbxk-[kP(Jxk,p] dv, 
Y' j' 
= ~ [(sk da- tkq daq) (Jxk- (skP da- mkPq daq) (Jxk,p] + 
Y' 
+ ~ [tkq(Jxk- mkPq hk,p] daq+ f (! [jk(Jxk-[kP(jxk,p] dv, 
Y' j' (232.8) = ~ [(skda- tkqdaq) (Jxk- (skP da- mkPq daq) (Jxk,p] + 
Y' 
+ f [(efk + tkq,q) hk- (etkP + mkPq,q) hk,p] dv + 
j' 
+ J [tkq (j xk,q- mkPq (j xk,pq] d v, 
j' 
where skP=-sPk, [kP=-[Pk, mkPq=-mPkq. We now assert the principle of 
virtual work in the form (232.6), except that m3 is given by (232.8) rather than by 
(232.5), and again only rigid virtual displacements (Jx are allowed. 
First we consider only the subdass of virtual translations. For these, we must 
have .r e xk (Jxk dv = ~ (sk da - tkq daq) (Jxk + f (e jk + tkq,q) (j xk dv' (232.9) 
j' Y' j' 
a result equivalent to both (203.6) and (205.2). In other words, for Cauchy's 
first law and the associated boundary condition to hold it is necessary and sufficient 
that the virtual work done in any virtual translation equal the virtual work of the 
inertial force. We now assume that this condition is satisfied 3 • Then from (232.8) 
1 Following the views of LAGRANGE for incompressible perfect fluids, ProLA regarded it 
as a great merit of the method that nothing need be said about the stresses in advance; rather, 
their appearance is compelled by the variational process alone, once one accepts the principle 
(232.6) with appropriately restricted variations. Whether or not this is a natural approach 
to mechanics is a matter of taste. We share the opinion of the Lagrange-Piola method 
expressed by TODHUNTER [ 1886, 4, § 764]; cf. also Sect. 231. 2 MuRNAGHAN [1937, 7, § 2] considers only the non-polar case. The additional terms used 
above were suggested by HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 4a]. 3 In the treatment based on (232.1), all variations fJxk, (Jxkrn• ... , are independent, and 
the members of the system (205.19) follow independently of one another in any order we 
please. In the present treatment, the variations (Jxk,m being defined as (fJxk),m, are determined 
from the variations fJxk• andin order to derive the ba!ance of moment of momentum we must 
first assume (in effect) that linear momentum is already in balance. 
PIOLA [ 1848, 2, ~~ 71-76] in effect considered a variational principle similar to (232.3) 
with (Jxkm ... p replaced by (Jxk,m .. . p. and for rigid virtual displacements he showed that such 
a principle implies CAUCHY's first law, with the stresses being combinations of the multipliers 
of all orders. 
598 
follows 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Ciassical Field Theories. 
jill =I e xk ~xk dv- ~ (skP da- mkfJq daq) ~X[k,p] - ) 
r 9' 
-I (elkP + mkt>q,q) ~x[k,Pl dv + 
+f (t<kq) ~x(k,q) + tfkq] ~x[k,qJ- mkPq ~x[k,p]q) dv, 
r 
Sect. 232A. 
(232.10) 
and our principle asserts that !m =I e'Xk ~xk dv for all variations ~~ such that 
r ~x(k,m) = 0. With the further condition ~x[k,p]m = 0, we are still able to give 
arbitrary constant values to the three independent components of the field 
~x[k,m]• and this suffices to derive (203.5) and (205.10). In other words, for the 
generalform of Cauchy's second law and the associated boundary condition to hold, 
supposing the first law holds, it is necessary and sulficient that the virtual work 
donein any virtual rotation be zero. When both of CAUCHY's laws and the associated 
boundary conditions hold, (232.10) reduces to 
!m- I e xk ~xk dv =I (t(kq) ~x(k,q)- mkPq ~x[k,p]q) dv. 
r r 
(232.11) 
In the non-polar case, !ro-I e xk ~xk dv is analogous to the total stress power, 
r 
but in the general case this analogy does not hold, as is plain from (217.6). An 
advantage of the formulation we have just given is that the symmetry of the 
stress tensor in the non-polar case follows easily and naturally if we simply 
omit in (232.8) the terms involving l and m. 
The variational fonns of the principle of virtual work are now traditional, but it is equally 
possible to put it directly in terms of the velocity field, replacing {Jxk by virtual velöcities vk 
throughout. A virtual velocity, like a virtual displacement, is at bottom no more than an 
arbitrary vector field. For example, a rewording of some of the above results in terms of 
virtual velocities is: The actual motion of a continuous medium is such as to make the total 
rate of working of the stress on the boundary and the elfective force f- !i in the interior zero in 
an arbitrary virtual Iranstation; in the actual motion, for the non-polar case, this rate of working 
is the total stress power. 
An interesting application of the principle of virtual work was given in Sect. 229. 
232A. Appendix. Virtual work in the case when there is a strain energy. We consider 
the special case when there exists a function a(x~. XM) such thatl 
~=~skfJxkda+fefkfJxkdv-fJfeadv, (232A.1) 
9' r r 
where e is varied in such a way that {J (e dv) = 0. Since by ( 156.1) and GREEN's transformation 
follows2 
(232A.2) 
=th e+fJxkdAK-f(e 0: ). fJxkdV, 'f OX ·K ox.K ,K !J . ..;:- . 
where tildes indicate quantities appropriate to the reference configuration, in the case when 
there are no constraints we derive from (232.4Jt 
skda= TkKdAK on .9', (ixk=T{K+!ifk in "Y, (232A.3) 
1 In principle, the analysis is due to GREEN [ 1839. 1, pp. 253- 256]; his work was corrected 
and extended by HAUGHTON [1849, 1, p. 152] and KIRCHHOFF [1850, 2, § 1]. 
2 Since x~K =oxkfoxK, by the rule given in Sect. 97 we have fJxk.K = (fJxk).K. In the 
variations, Xis kept constant. ' ' 
Sect. 232A. Appendix. Virtual work in the case when there is a strain energy. 599 
where 
(232A.4) 
Equations (232A.3) have the sameform as (210.5) and (210.8). The foregoing analysis signifies 
that when the inner part of the virtual work is the variation of a volume integral whose density 
is a function of the deformation gradients only, the existence of the stress tensor follows directly 
from the principle of virtual work; moreover, the stresses are then purely elastic, in the sense 
defined in Sect. 218. 
If we assume that the assigned force f is conservative in the sense of (218.1), and if we 
adopt the convention that in the varied motion the assigned surface force s da is the same 
as at corresponding points on the actual motion, (232A.1) may be written as a simple variation: 
2{ = b%, where -%""'- ~ sk uk da+ f (! T dv, 
!I' -r (232A.5) 
u is the displacement vector, and T is the total potential, U + a. There is an evident analogy 
to the work theorem (218.9), for which, however, it was assumed that the reference configuration X was material, while for the present development no such restriction is necessary. 
If we add the assumption that (232A.4) may be inverted 1 to yield x~K as a function of X 
or :r, t, and TmM, by the usual device of a contact transformation we may exhibit this function. Indeed, put 
_ 1 K k )<! = a- -ir Tk X;K· (232A.6) 
Then for t = const we have by (232A.4) 
(232A.7) 
so that with a considered as a function of the variables XM, x~K and with )<! considered as 
a function of the variables XM, T,.Kf(i, we have ' 
oxk k ou 
oXK = x;K = - o (T.Kj(i) ' . k 
In what follows now, we consider the special case of (232A.8) when 
(232A.8) 
(232A.9) 
Then the theorem of Hellinger and E. Reissner 2 asserts that the variational principle 
[e(xk- fk) bxk dV = c5 [ [ (~t- T,.K x7Kl dV + f skuk dA+ [ T,.K(uk -vk) dAK], (232A.10) 
-r -r ~ ~ 
where both the deformation ;r (X, t) and the stress components T,.K are varied independently, is 
equivalent to Cauchy's first law and (232A.9) in .Y, to the stress boundary condition (203.6h on 
the part 9; of the boundary, and to the displacement boundary condition u = v on the remaining 
part ~. To f"Stablish this result, we execute the variations on the right-hand side of (232A.10) 
1 For the variational theorem which follows now, it is essential that this inversion be 
possible not merely locally but in the !arge. Most writers on the subject apparently fail to 
appreciate that for typical non-quadratic functional forms for a, this is most unlikely. 
2 HELLING ER [ 1914, 4, § 7 e] considered f.t as depending on ;r as weil as TkK, thus including 
the potential energy as in (232A.S). REISSNER [1953, 27] adjusted the boundary integrals, 
which were omitted by HELLINGER, so as to be appropriate to mixed boundary conditions. 
He considered only the special case when (232A.9) is replaced by E KM=o~tfoTKM; effectively, 
CAUCHY's second law is assumed. Cf. also MANACORDA [1954, 14]. 
600 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 233. 
obtaining 
f [( oiK - ~K) 6TkK- T,.K 6x7K] dV + - k i'" 
+ fskfJxkdA + J [fJT,.K(uk- vk) + T,.KfJxk]dAK 
~ #2 
(232A.11) 
= f[(o~K -x7K)6TkK+T,.~KfJxk]dV-~ TkKfJxkdAK+ 
~ ~+~ 
+ J sk fJxk dA+ J[fJT,.K(uk- vk) + T,.K fJxk] dAK, 
#1 #2 
= f [(oi.K - x7K) 6TkK + T,.~K fJxk] dV + - k i'" 
+ f(skdA- T,.K dAK) fJxk + f (uk- vk) 6TkK dAK. 
!/1 #2 
Substituting this last form for the right-hand side of (232A.10) gives a formula from which 
the desired result follows at once. 
If in the HELLINGER-REISSNER theorem we suppose that only the stress, not the displacement, is varied, we obtain a variational principle yielding only (232A.9). not CAUCHY's 
first law. This principle may be used to select from the class of equilibrated stress systems 
one in which there is a strain energy1. If, on the other hand, we vary only the displacement, then 6p, = o, and by omitting f-1. from (232A.10) we get the principle of virtual work 
in its classical form, to be studied further in Sect. 236A. 
233. Virtual work in a constrained body. When a body is subject to internal 
constraints, providing these da no work, the virtual work is still given by (232.1), 
but the variations bx at neighboring points are no Ionger fully arbitrary, and 
from (232.3) we cannot conclude CAUCHY's first law without delay. 
Consider first the special case when the constraint is that of incompressibility. 
We now restriet the variations ba: so as to comply with this constraint: ( bxk) k = 0. 
Therefore ' - J P (bxk),kdv = 0, (233.1) 
i'" 
where we have introduced a multiplier - p corresponding to the constraint2, 
and we may replace (232.4) by 
0 = ~ (sk- tkmnm) bxk da+ J [tkm,m+e (fk-xk)] bxk dv-J P (bxk),kdv, ) 
[/' i'" i'" (23 3 .2) 
= ~ (sk- tkmnm+P gkmnm) bxkda+ J [tkm,m+e (fk-xk) -gkmP,mJ bxkdv, 
[/' i'" 
with unrestricted bx. We infer (203.6) and (205.2) as before, except that the stress 
tensor t is now replaced by t- p 1, where p is arbitrary. 
The difference between CAUCHY's first law and the result just obtained is 
easy to understand. CAUCHY's law refers to the entire stress, whatever its origin. 
The stress entering the principle of virtual work does not include any stress required 
to maintain the constraints, so lang as such stresses da no work. Naturally, then, 
results obtained from the principle of virtual work are indeterminate to within 
1 This principle is usually named after MENABREA and CASTIGLIANO, who formulated it 
in terms of frameworks. For the case of finite strain, cf. B. FINZI [ 1940, 11] and LANGHAAR 
[1953. 16]. 
2 This procedure, in essence, derives from LAGRANGE [1762, 3, § 40]. Surface constraints 
are consdered by FERRARESE [1958, JA]. 
Sect. 233. Virtual work in a constrained body. 601 
whatever stress may exist without doing work in constrained motions of the type 
considered. Indeed, from (217.7) we see that the stress power of a non-zero 
hydrostatic pressure is zero if and only if the motion is isochoric. 
General constraints dependent on the velocity gradient may be taken into 
account in just the same way. Let the tensorial equations of constraint be 
cpk ... n(x' t) = o a = 1, 2, ... , m, a ... q , s' , 
where the orders of the tensors aC need not be the same. 
variations l>x satisfying 
m f o ck ... m " pn ... q __(l_n . ._._q_ (l>x') dv = 0 L.J a k ... m oxr ,s , a~l "f" ,s 
(233·3) 
Consider only those 
(233 .4) 
where aPL:~. is a tensor of multipliers. The same procedure leads to boundary 
conditions and equations of motion in which tkm is replaced by 
m 0 cu ... s 
tk m + gk r " pn .. . q __(1____1<_..:: • L.. a u ... s oi' a~l ,m 
(233.5) 
The fact that in general there exist no motions satisfying the fully general constraints (233.3) does not invalidate the procedure. 
Sometimes there are constraints depending on the deformation gradients x7K 
from a reference state 1 . For simplicity, consider a single equation of the form 
c ( x\ K, t) = 0 . (233 .6) 
The variations are now subject to the constraint 
oc (~ k) - -k- uX ;K-0. 
OX;K (233.7) 
To apply this side condition, it is convenient to transform (232.2) by introducing 
the variables appropriate to the description in terms of a reference state. By 
(210.4), (210.6), and (20.9), in the classical non-polar case we get 
12! = p (skda- PK dAK) l>xk + J (PK;K +?! jk) l>xk dV. (233.8) 
g' "f" 
Now introducing a multiplier p corresponding to the constraint (233.7) and proceeding as before, we obtain the boundary condition corresponding to (210.5) 
and the equations of motion in ·ProLA's form (210.8), except that in both the 
double vector PK is replaced by 
TkK -pgkm~. (233.9) OXm;K 
Equivalently, the stress tensor t is replaced by 
(233-10) 
From the results (233.5) and (233.10) it is evident that general constraints 
such as (233.3) or (233.6) yield a non-symmetric contribution to the stress 2• 
As is shown by the example of isochoric motion, certain special constraints may 
be maintained by symmetric stresses. 
1 PoiNCARE [1889, 8, § 152] [1892, 11, § 33]. Cf. HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 4c], who considers constraints involving higher derivatives. ERICKSEN and RIVLIN [1954, 6, § 4] work 
out the explicit form of the result which is implied because c is a scalar. 2 This was remarked by ERICKSEN and RIVLIN [1954, 6, § 3]. 
602 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 234. 
All the constraints considered in this section are of the type called holonomic1• 
Non-holonomic constraints will be mentioned in Sect. 237. 
234. Converse of the principle of virtual work. DoRN and ScHILD2 have formulated an elegant converse to the principle of virtual work in the static 
and non-polar case: Suppose that, corresponding to any vector u given on Y, there 
exists a symmetric tensor c such that 
JOtkmckmdv = pOtkmukdam (234.1) 
-r [/' 
for all null stresses 0t; then the vector field u can be extended throughout f in such a 
way that 
(234.2) 
In other words, if u =X it follows that in fact c = d. The statement of the theorem 
is limited to null stresses only for simplicity, the extension to general equilibrated 
stresses being easy, but for motion rather than equilibrium the formulation is 
awkward. The proof of the theorem is divided into two stages: (a) we show that 
c satisfies the conditions of compatibility for d, and thereafter (b) we prove 
(234.2). 
Proof of (a). By (227.10), we may write the hypothesis (234.1) in the form 
J ekrs e'lmn a,m,sn Ckq dv = p ekrs eqmn a,m,sn UR daq, (234.3) 
-r [/' 
where a is an arbitrary symmetric tensor. Two applications of GREEN's transformation put (234.3) into the form 
-r (234.4) 
J ekrs eqmnckq,snarmdv ) 
= j ekrs eqmn {ckq,n a,m da5 - Ckq a,m,s da"+ a,m,sn Uk daq} · 
We choose a as zero outside a small region surrounding a given point, thus annulling the surface integral on the right; since a may be arbitrary, to within 
requirements of smoothness, we conclude that ekrseqmnckq,sn• since it is symmetric, 
must vanish. By the remarks following (84.3), or by those at the end of Sect. 34, 
there exists a vector v such that 
(234.5) 
Proof of (b). From (234.5), GREEN's transformation, and the fact that 0t 
is a null stress, we have 
Comparison with (234.1) yields 
p 0tkm (uk- vk) dam = 0 
[/' 
(234.6) 
(234.7) 
for arbitrary null stresses 0t. This condition asserts that the virtual work of an 
arbitrary equilibrated stress in the virtual displacement uk- vk is zero. Hence 
the motion u- v is rigid. That is, there exist constants wkm and bk such that 
1 HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 4c] discusses also holonornic constraints applied only on surfaces or lines, as weil as constraints which are inequalities. 2 [1956, 4]. The staternent (a) and its proof are due to LocATELLI [1940, 15 and 16], 
who considered also the case when the assigned force does not vanish. 
Sects. 235,236. Lagrangian and Haroiltonian principles. 603 
(234.8) 
on f/'. Now v is defined through "f/". Therefore we may take (234.8) as extending 
the definition of u throughout "f/". Since u(k,m) =v(k,m)• (234.2) follows from 
(234.5). Q.E.D. 
L. FINZI 1 has remarked that the process leading from (234.1) to the conditions of compatibility for (234.2) is entirely general and may be applied in any 
space where covariant differentiation is defined. For example, let the general 
null stress have the form 
Otkm = akm A + bkmr A,, + ckmrs A,,. + .... (234.9} 
Substitution in (234-3) and proceeding as in the lines following yields 
0 = akm ckm- (bkmr ck".},, + (ckmrs ck ... ),,.- . . . (234.10} 
as the conditions of compatibility. The reader may use this result to derive 
(84.5) from (229.8), and to derive (84.4) from (229.10). The process is easily 
modified so as to apply to the case when the general null stress is given in terms 
of a tensor of stress functions Akm or Ak,.Pq• etc. 
235. Principle of minimum stress intensity. Given a symmetric tensor field skm 
in "f/", we shall say it is given a potential increment when it is replaced by skm + 
bck,m)• where bis a vector field which vanishes upon the boundary f/'of "f/". If 
sk"',".=O, we have 
[skm + b(k,m)] [skm + b(k,m)] = Skm skm + (2bk sk"'),m + b(k,m) b(k,m). (235.1) 
By GREEN'S transformation follows 
I [skm + b(k,m)J [skm + b(k,m>] dv =I [skm skm + b(k,m) bCk,ml] dv, ) 
..".. ..".. (23 5 .2) ~ Isk".skmdv, 
..".. 
where equality holds if and only if b(k,m) = 0. The analysis is valid in a Riemannian 
space of any number of dimensions, so long as the metric be positive definite. 
We apply the foregoing result to a body subject to no assigned force, both 
in the three-dimensional and the four-dimensional cases, so obtaining PRATELLI's 
theorems of minimum stress intensity 2 : 
1. In steady motion, the total intensity of a stress tensor t- (!~~ satisfying 
Cauchy's laws is a minimum with respect to potential increments. 
2. In a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system in an inertial frame, the total 
intensity of a world stress-momentum tensor (211.2) satisfying the equations of 
continuity and momentum balance is a minimum with respect to potential increments. 
From the analysis, it is evident that no result of this kind can be expected to 
hold for general variations of stress. 
236. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian principles. In this section and the next we 
derive principles related to (232.4). Thus we are restricting attention to principles 
equivalent to CAUCHY's first law. 
1 [1956, 7, § 10]. Indeed, the stateroent above roay easily be inferred froro the work of 
LOCATELLI [1940, 15 and 16]. 2 [1953, 25]. PRATELLI, who uses variational calculus, does not obtain an absolute 
roinirouro in space-tiroe because he uses the energy-rooroenturo tensor of special relativity 
rather than the classical tensor (211.2). 
604 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 236A. 
By (170.4), we may write (232.4) in the form 
:t J ex,.~x"dv = ~~ + ~. (236.1) 
"'" where ~ is the kinetic energy and where the variation of density satisfies ~ (ed v) = 0. 
Eq. (236.1), which is merely a rewriting of the principle of virtual work, is 
called the Lagrangian central equation1• 
Integrating (236.1) from t=t1 to t=t2 , we impose the condition that ~:JJ=O 
at t=t1 and at t=t2 so as to obtain Hamilton's principle 2 : 
tz f (~~ + ~) dt = 0' (236.2) tl 
und conversely, by the identity (236.1), if (236.2) holds for every pair of times t1 
and t2 , (232.4) for all admissible ~:JJ follows. 
By further restriction of the variations, it is easy to derive the principle of 
least action from (236.2). 
The elegant and useful forms that these principles assume for systems of masspoints do not carry over to general continuum mechanics. 
236A. Appendix. HAMILTON'S principle in the case when there is a strain energy. In the 
special case when the formula (232A.S) holds, HAMILTON's principle (236.2) may be written 
in the more familiar form 
tg 
t5 J 53dt = 0, tl 
(236A.1) 
where 
53= f J.dV+ ~s,.ukda, ;. =e0 [!x2 - •]. 
"'" 9' 
(236A.2) 
Here the tildes have been dropped, for the reference configuration must be a fixed one. 
While the equivalence of this variational principle to CAUCHY's first law, the associated 
stress boundary condition, and the stress-strain relations (232A.4) follows from results already 
given in Sect. 232A, (236A.t) is our only example of a variational principle of the conventional simple type to which the Euler formulae may be applied, so we give an independent 
verification 3 • Recalling that in the material description_ik = 8 xkf8t, we think of the time integral 
of the volume integral in (236A.t) as an integral over a four-dimensional manifold, and to 
this integral we apply the usual rules of the calculus of variations. Hence, when there are 
no constraints, the spatial differential equations following from (236A.t) are 
(236A.3) 
equivalent to CAucHv's first law when there is a strain energy and a potential energy. 
1 For continuum mechanics, this equation was introduced in a somewhat more general 
form by,HEUN [1913, 4, § 21] and HELLINGER [1914, 4, §Sb]. These authors consider also 
an alternative form in which the time as weil as the path is varied. 2 According to HELLINGER [1914, 4, §Sb], the extension of HAMILTON's principle to 
continuous mediawas first obtained byWALTER [1868,15]; it was given also by KIRCHHOFF 
[1876, 2, Vorl. 11, § S]. 3 KIRCHHOFF [1859. 2, § 1]. While in [1852, 1] it was assumed that the strain energy 
is a quadratic function, as far as concerns the variational formulation this restriction was 
not used. 
The second variational principle of CLEBSCH, which we have presented in a purely kinematical form in Sect. 137, may be interpreted as a special case of HAMILTON's principlc. 
ZEMPLEN [190S, 7] [1905, 9, § 3] used (236.1) to obtain (236A.3), (210.5). and (20S.3). The 
general formula has been rediscovered by DE DONDER and VAN DEN DUNGEN [1949, 5] and by 
E.HöLDER [19SO, 11, §§ 1-3], who discuss alternative forms. 
Sect. 237. The principle of extreme compulsion. 605 
In the above formulation of HAMILTON's principle, l?o is taken as an assigned function 
of X, and any additional parameters upon which the function T may depend are kept fixed 
in the variation. We may set eo= ef by ( 156.2), and then, as has been remarked by HERIVEL1, 
we may vary I? and the additional parameters, at the same time setting up as side conditions 
the continuity equation and the constancy of the additional parameters for each particle. 
The result is unchanged. It is also possible, though more elaborate, to formulate HAMILTON's 
principle in terms of the spatial variables and to vary the velocity field rather than the displacement2. 
237. The principle of extreme compulsion 3• In the principle of virtual work 
(232.4), the variation IJ;r may be selected as any field satisfying the constraints, 
presumed holonomic. Precisely, as we have seen in Sect. 233, this means that 
if there are constraints 4 
aC(x,X,x~K,x7KM• ... ,t) =0, (237.1) 
then (j;r ranges over the dass of vectors v satisfying 
8aC vk+~~vkK + _Jla~vkKM + ... = 0. 
8xk 8x7K ' 8x7KM ' (237.2) 
For the actual motion, differentiating (237.1) materially yields 
8aC xk+ 8aC X~ +_Jlo~_xk + ... + 8aC =0 8xk 8 k ,K 8 k ,KM 8t ' x;K x;KM (237-3) 
8aC "k+ 8aC "k + 8aC "k + +F _ --X ··~·-X.K ---X·KM ··· -0 8xk 8x7K ' 8x7K M ' ' (237.4) 
where Fis a function of JJ, X, x7K' x7K M' ... '.Xk, x7K' .... This identity suggests 
a means of constructing variational fields which conform to the constraints. 
Consider the dass of variationssuch that, at each fixed instant, the varied motion 
has the same displacement and the same velocity as the original motion, but not 
necesarily the same acceleration: 
(j;r = 0, I'Jx = o. (237.5) 
For such variations, by (237.1) we have IJ(oaCfoxk)=O, ... , and IJF=O. From 
(237.4) follows 
--uX 8aC ~"k+ --uX.K 8aC ~"k + ... - . 
_0 
8xk ox7K ' (23 7.6) 
This is an equation of the form (237.2). What we have proved is that if IJx is 
any variation satisfying (237.5), then IJx is an admissible virtual displacement 
field. We may therefore replace IJ;r by I'Jx in (232.4), obtaining 
f exk IJxkdv = 9i sk IJxkda + J [elk IJxk- tkm I'Jxk,m] dv. (237.7) 
r Y' r 
Hence, supposing IJ(e dv) =0, we get 
1Jfiex2 dv= pskiJxkda+ f[efkiJxk-tkmiJxk,mJdv. (237.8) 
r Y' r 
1 [1955. 13, § 1]. 
2 Unsatisfactory special cases are given by EcKART [1938, 4, § 3] and HERIVEL [1955. 
13, § 2]; their result is corrected by LrN in a work not yet published. We make no attempt 
to cite the !arge hydrodynamical Iiterature on special variational principles, some of which is 
discussed by SERRIN, Sect. 15 of The Mathematical Principles of Fluid Mechanics, this Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII/1. 3 For systems of mass-points, this principle is associated with the names of GAuss, LrPSCHITZ, GrBBS, and APPELL. For continuum mechanics, we follow the development of BRILL 
[1909, 2, § 18] and HELLINGER [1914, 4, §Sc]. 4 The tensorial character of the equations of constraint is irrelevant here. 
606 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 238. 
If we add the convention that at points and times in the varied motions the same 
force f is assigned as at the corresponding points in the actual motion, so that 
()j=O, we may replace (237.8) by 
(j f l e(~- /) 2 dv = ~ s" ()x"da- ftkm(jxk,mdv. ~ ~ ~ 
(237-9) 
The integral whose variation stands on the left is the totalsquared effective force, 
or the compulsion, of the motion, and the variational equation (237-9) is the 
principle of extreme compulsion1• 
The principle may be extended so as to hold for non-kolonomic constraints of 
the more general form 
C ( X k .. k "k "k ) - a :JJ, ,X;K•X";.KM•···•X,X;K•···•t -0. (237.10) 
For the actual motionundersuch a constraint, we have 
oaC "k + oaC ··k + + oaC "k + + oaC _ --X --X.K · · · --X · · · ---0 oik oi~K ' oxk ot . (237.11) 
In order that varied motions satisfying (237.5) be compatible with (237.11), it 
is necessary and sufficient that 
(237.12) 
Thus for constraints of the type (23 7.1 0) we may still infer the principle of extreme 
compulsion, but the variations besides satisfying (237-5) are subjected to (237.12) 
as an additional condition. 
238. Remarks on mechanics in generalized spaces. There have been many 
discussions of mechanical principles appropriate to non-Euclidean spaces 2• Except 
for relativistic mechanics, which is outside the scope of this treatise, these developments seem to consist mainly in observations that certain parts of the theory 
do not require Euclidean three-dimensional space, but may be carried over 
bodily to more general ambients. 
For example 3, while the momentum principle in the form {196.3), since it 
requires that the integrals of vector fields over bodies enjoy invariance, is restricted 
to Euclidean spaces, or at least to spaces with distant parallelism, CAUCHY's 
laws (205 .2) and (205 .11) are meaningful in any space where covariant differentiation may be defined 4• Sometimes they are derived for Riemannian spaces by 
assuming that the momentum principle applies to infinitely small volumes, but 
in essence such a derivation is no more than a direct postulation of the desired 
result. There are infinitely many possible "laws" of mechanics in generalized 
spaces if we demand no more than that they be invariant and intrinsic equations which in the Euclidean case reduce to CAUCHY's laws. For example, if 
R",.. is the contracted curvature tensor of an affine space, we may replace x" by x" +KR" ,..x"' in (205.2), and for all values of K the resulting equation reduces 
in Euclidean spaces to the usual form of CAUCHY's first law. 
Another formal generalization, the analogue of common practice in masspoint mechanics, replaces sr in (236.1) or in (236.2) by 
(238.1) 
1 As if English vocabulary were insufficient to supply two different words to translate 
"Nebenbedingung" and "Zwang", (237-9) is often called "the principle of least constraint". 2 See Special Bibliography M at the end of this treatise. 3 VAN DANTZIG [1934, 10, Part IV, § 1]. 
' At bottom, thisis the content of BELTRAMI's observation [1881, 1, p. 389] that Eq. (232.4) 
is meaningful and may be applied in curved Riemannian spaces. 
Sect. 239. Scope and plan of the chapter an energy and entropy. 607 
where a""' di" dx"' is an arbitrary quadratic form, not necessarily reducible to 
a sum of squares, and not necessarily the metric tensor of space. 
A third generalization1, more interesting from the mechanical point of view, 
replaces the principle of virtual work (232.4), after converting it as in {232A.2) 
to an expression in terms of a material reference state xcx, by a tour-dimensional 
equation 
/dt { fsk t5x" da+ f [eo {f" t5x" + bk t5~")- Tkcx t5x7cx] dv} = 0, I I f/' 'lVg 
(238.2) 
putting the impulsive coefficients b" on a par with force and stress as coefficients 
in a linear variational form. As in HAMILTON's principle, it is supposed that 
t5~=0 at t=t1 and at t=t2 • Equivalent to {238.2), in the case when there are 
no constraints, are the equations 
skda=T ... cxdAcx on Y,} 
eobk=eoi ... +T,.cx;cx in -r. {238.3) 
The case when b = ;i gives the classical equations in the form (210.5), {210.8); 
the case when bk =akmx"' gives the generalization described in the paragraph 
preceding. It is easy to extend (238.2) to a mechanics of moments which generalizes that following from {232.3). 
E. Energy and entropy. 
239. Scope and plan of the chapter. We attempt to collect here everything 
of a general nature concerning the balance of energy in continuous media and the 
mathematical properties of entropy. There can be no doubt of the relevance 
of the first subchapter, which defines the specific internal energy and derives 
differential equations and jump conditions expressing the balance of total energy 
in such a way as to reflect the interconvertibility of heat and work. 
The second subchapter concerns the more special and more dubious subject 
of thermodynamics. The specific entropy is regarded as a static defining parameter entering a caloric equation of state which is supposed to regulate the 
specific internal energy, regardless of deformation and motion. The formal content of this subchapter coincides with that customarily said to describe "reversible" processes in a substance obeying an equation of state depending upon any 
finite number of parameters, except that our considerations are phrased in terms 
of a particle in a general continuum and that we do not take up the special thermodynamic properties distinguishing fluids from solids. The subchapter ends by 
deriving a differential equation for the production of entropy and by discussing 
relations between the rate of change of total entropy and inequalities governing 
local changes of entropy. 
The last subchapter considers several definitions of equilibrium and mentions 
connections between stability of equilibrium and inequalities restricting thermodynamic equations and quantities. 
In historical origin the balance of energy and the theory of the equation of 
state, logically independent and in fact relevant to different levels of physical 
1 Due to HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 5d], generalizing a form proposed by E. and F. CossERAT [1909, 5, §§ 61-67, 76-80]. 
608 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 240. 
generality, are intertwined not only with each other but also with a third concept, 
that heat and temperature are mean manifestations of molecular motion. To 
CARNOT (1824-1832) is due not only a general understanding and statement 
of the equivalence of heat and work, formulated independently by JOULE ( 1843) 
and WATERSTON (1843), but also the concept of entropy. While owing much to 
numerous earlier researches, the first thermodynamic writing to achieve a modicum 
of clarity is that of GIBBS (1873-1875), upon which our treatment is based, 
though we do not enter many of the details and applications he developed, nor 
do we fail to elaborate the mathematical structure rendered possible and natural 
by his approach. 
There exists no other comparably general and complete exposition of the 
material given in this chapter1• 
I. The balance of energy. 
240. The law of energy balance. In Sect. 217 we have seen that kinetic energy 
st' generally fails to be conserved. Using the apparatus of Sect. 157, we could 
set up an influx and a supply of kinetic energy and so obtain a general equation 
of balance for it 2• Such a balance, while not incorrect, does not lead to a fruitful 
theory, because it fails to reflect the physical principle of interconvertibility of 
heat and mechanical work. This principle, which is too broad and too vague for 
us to attempt a general formulation, as well as too old for us to include its history3 
in this treatise, suggests that any equation of energy balance should contain 
terms which can be identified with non-mechanical transfer of energy. These 
terms may, but need not be dependent upon changes of temperature. To keep 
full generality, we refrain from defining temperature specifically until the next 
subchapter, but its effects remain in our minds to motivate the introduction of 
the non-mechanical power, 0. 
At the same time, the special theorems on conservation of energy in Sect. 218, 
in the circumstances when they hold, should not remain outside the general for1 Wehave been unable to derive much help from any of the numerous treatises except 
that of PARTINGTON [1949, 22, Sect. II], distinguished for its concise and clear statements of 
practice and for its critical references. 
2 Such is the approach of MATTIOLI [1914, 7]. 
3 That heat is a mode of motion was widely believed in the eighteenth century, and both 
EuLER ( 1 729, 1782) and DANIEL BERNOULLI ( 1738) constructed kinetic molecular models 
in which temperature may be identified with the kinetic energy of the molecules. The generat 
and phenomenologi<;al principle, independent of a molecular interpretation, is more recent. 
That it was known to CARNOT by 1832 is proved by his notes [1878, I], which calculate the 
mechanical equivalent of heat and project the porous plug experiment. The contention of 
CLAUSIUS, still reproduced in textbooks, that CARNOT's celebrated treatise [1824, I] obtained 
correct results from an incorrect axiom, is shown tobe false, as PARTINGTON [ 1949. 22, Part II, 
§ 33. last footnote] has remarked, by the presentation of LIPPMAN [1889, 5, pp. 76-78]; 
to render CARNOT's work in accord with later views, translate "calorique" as "entropy" 
(cf. CALLENDER [1910, 3, §§ 16, 20, 22], LAMER [1949, I6]), but is unlikely that anyone would 
grasp the principle of conservation of energy from reading CARNOT's treatise. 
In our opinion, the first clear statements to be published are those of JouLE [1843, 2] 
[1845, I and 2] [1847, 2] and WATERSTON [1843, 5], the latter's being more restricted in 
scope because derived exclusively from a kinetic molecular model. Forerunners are MoHR 
[1837. 4], SEGUIN [1839. 2, Chap. VII, § 1], and J.R. MAYER [1842, 2]. The history of the 
"first law of thermodynamics" is discussed by JouLE [1864, I], TAIT [1868, 14, Introd. and 
Chap. I] [1876, 6, §§ Il, III, and Introd. to 2nd ed.], CHERBULIEZ [1871, 3], HELMHOLTZ 
[1882, I], MACH [1896. 3, PP· 238-268], SARTON [1929. 8], EPSTEIN [1937,I. § 11], BOYER 
[1943, I]; the most nearly complete account is given by PARTINGTON [1949. 22, Part Il, 
§§ 10-12]. 
Sect. 241. The equation of energy balance for continuous media. 609 
malism. The existence of a strain energy in some cases suggests that in the most 
general motions we introduce an internal energy G:, an additive set function 
such that the total energy Sl' + @ is balanced. 
The fundamental energy balance is then 1 
(240.1) 
where ID3 is the mechanical power or total rate of working of the mechanical 
actions upon the body. This basic law, sometimes called the "first law of thermodynamics"2, is tobe set alongside the laws of momentum (196-3). 
241. The equation of energy balance for continuous media. For a continuum, 
the mechanical power ID3 is the rate of working of the stress vector and the couple 
stress on the boundary, plus the rate of working of the assigned forces and couples 
in the interior (cf. Sects. 217, 232); the non-mechanical power 0, as tobe expected 
from Sect.157, is expressed in terms of an efflux of energy 3 h and a supply of energy 
q. Thus (240.1) becomes 4 
~ + ~ = p (tP' ip- mPqrwpq) da,+ J (fP.iq-lPq wpq) dl)R + ) [/' -r 
+ p hP d ap + J q d>JR. [/' -r 
(241.1) 
The internal energy @, being an additive set function 5, may be expressed in terms 
of a specific internal energy e: 
(241.2) 
Thus (241.1) is an equation of balance (157.1). In regions where t.~. m, w, and h 
are continuously differentiable, while ä-!, i,f, l, and q are continuous, we may apply 
(157.6) and obtain 
exPip+ ei =tP',,xp + t<Pqldpq+ t[Pqlwpq- ) 
-mPq',, Wpq-mPqr Wpq,r + 
+ efP.iP-etPqwpq+ hP,P+ eq. 
(241.3) 
where we have used (217.6). By CAUCHY's laws (205 .2) and (205 .1 0), this reduces to 
(241.4) 
1 The first statement approaching this degree of generality was given by DuHEM [1892, 3, 
Chap. III, § 3]. 
2 Since the same title is often conferred upon far more restricted assertions, we prefer 
to eschew it, especially since (240.1) isafundamental balance, on a par with the balances of 
momentum and electromagnetism, while the other "laws" of thermodynamics are more 
special in nature. See Sect. 244. 
a The introduction of this vector, not necessarily restricted by any constitutive equation 
relating it to the temperature, is due to STOKES [1851, 3]. 
4 The minus signs put before the rates of working of the couples are required by the conventions expressed by (App. 3.3) and the remarks following it. For example, l· !- w = - zpq Wpq· 
Most treatments take h with the opposite sign so as to represent an influx rather than an 
efflux. 
6 It is possible, of course, to consider a more general case when there are surface distributions and isolated sources of energy. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 39 
610 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 241. 
the differential equation of energy balance 1. It is equivalent to the general 
principle of energy balance (241.1) when the above-stated requirements of 
smoothness are satisfied and when in addition the balance of momentum and of 
moment of momentum is assumed. It is important to notice that the stress 
power tkmik m• which figures in the work theorem (217.1), does not give all of 
the mechanical contribution to the increase of internal energy except in the 
non-polar case. 
At a surface of discontinuity, by (193.4) we obtain from (241.1) the jump 
condition 2 
e± U± [ 8 +! i 2] + n, [tPr ip - mPqr Wpq + h'] = 0. (241.5) 
It is natural to try to simplify the result by using also the conditions (205.3), 
(205 .4) expressing balance of momentum, but no very neat result emerges. In 
the non-polar case, the term involving the vorticity drops out, and the term 
preceding it becomes [t(nJ · x]. Resolving x and t(nl into components normal 
and tangential to the singular surface, by use of (185.6) and (189.14) we have 
[f(n)·~]=[tnnXn]+[f~n)t~Xt], ) 
[tnnXn]- Un[tnn]- Q U [tnn V], (241.6) 
[-! x2] = [-! U2] + un[Xn] + [-! i~]. 
Substituting these results into (241.5) and use of (205.6) 1 yields 
(241.7) 
In fact, (205.6) 2 has not been used, but it does not seem to make possible any 
real simplification of (241.7) without further assumptions. 
Two special cases are commonly met. First, if the surface of discontinuity 
is neither a slip surface nor a shock front, and if the vorticity is continuous or 
there is no couple stress, (241.5) reduces to FouRIER's condition 3 
[hn] = 0: (241.8) 
The normal flux of energy is continuous. Second, if t = - p 1 and there is neither 
couple stress nor flux of energy, (241.7) reduces to the form 4 
[e + pv +! U2] = 0 (241.9) 
1 That the material derivative should replace the partial time derivative in the equation 
of heat conduction for a moving medium was observed by FouRIER [1833, 1, Eq. (3)]; cf. 
ÜBERBECK [1879. 3, § 2]. The principle and scheme of the derivation of (241.4) are due to 
KIRCHHOFF [1868, 11, § 1], but his result is limited to infinitesimal motion of a perfect gas; 
later [1894. 5, Elfte Vor!., § 3] he removed the former restriction. That use of a differential 
equation expressing balance of energy is necessary except in specially simple circumstance 
was first emphasized by DuHEM [1891, 3, Val. I, Livre II, Chap. Ill, § 5]. [1901, 5], [1901, 7, 
Part I, Chap. 1, § 7]. [1903, 5], who calied it "la relation supplementaire"; fairly general 
cases of (241.4) were derived also by C. NEUMANN [1894, 7, § 4), VAN LERBERGHE [1933, 13], 
MEIXNER [1941, 2, § 3) [1942, 9, § 2], STEWART [1942, 12], TRUESDELL [1948, 35], and 
others. A theory of the energy and entropy of a continuum based on the existence of 
extrinsic and mutual potential energies was constructed by DuHEM [1893. 1, Chap. II] 
[1911, 4, Chap. XIV]. WEISSENBERG [1931, 11, §Ac II] [1935, 10, pp. 52, 138-141] 
divided the internal energy into "free" and "bound" portions. 2 A fairly general case is given by KoTCHINE [1926, 3, Eq. (21)]. A special result of this 
kind is obtained by MARSHAK [1958, 7, § 1). 3 [1822, 1, § 146]. 
' That the balance of energy is in general a condition independent of those of mass and 
momentum has long been evident in purely thermal problems, but the first mechanical 
context in which this factwas noted is the shock wave in a gas. The analysis of STOKES [ 1848, 4] 
presumed tacitly that the theorem of conservation of mechanical energy holding on each 
Sect. 241 A. Appendix: Relation between strain energy and internal energy. 611 
when the discontinuity is a shock 1, while when the discontinuity is not a shock, 
no restriction upon e results. In all these jump conditions it is assumed that no 
surface sources of energy lie upon the surface of discontinuity. 
To write the equation of energy balance in four-dimensionally invariant form 
is easy. Considering only the non-polar case, we make the following agreements: 
e and q shall be absolute world scalars, h shall be represented by an absolute 
space tensor (cf. Sect. 153) kD such that kD= (hk, 0) in every Euclidean frame. 
Let tD-1 be the space tensor (211.2), let g be the world scalar (153.12), and let 
L'J(!)'I' be the world tensor of stretching (153.10). Put 
D(j) 'I'= P(!)a P'I'D L'JBD' (241.10) 
where Pn-1 is the world tensor (153.21). The world tensor equation 
D oe • D-1D + 1 a (V-kD) ev i)xD =(!8 =t D-1 lfg oxD g +eq, (241.11) 
where u is the world velocity vector, reduces to the non-polar case of (241.4) in every 
Euclidean frame. Therefore, (241.11) is a world tensor form of the equation of 
energy balance 2• Note that (241.11) does not presume the existence of a world 
connection. It is a Euclidean invariant equation. 
241A. Appendix: Relation between strain energy and internal energy. The cases we 
interpolate here are far too special to deserve a place now, but we pause to note them so as 
to give the reader who is accustomed to a more conventional approach to energetic problems 
a hold on its place in our development. 
We restriet attention to the non-polar case. Considering the general energy equation 
(241.4), we search for assumptions such that terms on the right-hand side may be written 
in the form (! W. where W is some function of the variables encountered in earlier developments. Alternatively, we seek to express the stress-power P in terms of other scalars. Since 
the field f does not enter (241.4). to assume the existence of a potential energy, which simplified the equation of mechanical energy in Sect. 218, will have no effect here. However, the 
special assumptions (218.5) and (218.6) yield 
e (6- ä) = 0 t1>q dpq + k~p + eq, (241 A.1) 
as follows at once from (218. 7). In particular, ifthe right-hand side is zero, we get e = 11 + f (X), 
showing that when there is no dissipative stress, no flux of energy, and no supply of energy, 
the internal energy and the strain energy differ by a constant for each particle. 
Further formal simplification results when we assume 3 
an 0 tPq = --
odpq • (241A.2) 
side of the shock ensures conservation of energy also at the shock. This is not so. That a 
distinct additional condition is needed was first seen by RANKINE [1870, 6, §§ 7-9], who 
obtained a spl(cial case of (241.9) for lineal motion, as did HuGONIOT [1887, 1, § 149]. According to a note added in the 1883 reprint of [1848, 4], KELVIN and RAYLEIGH were aware of 
the matter. Cf. the·discussion by HADAMARD [1903, 11, 'i[ 209]. A special case for general 
motionwas derived by JouGUET [1901, 9] and discussed by DuHEM [1901, 7, Part 2, Chap. I, 
§§ 7-8] and ZEMPLEN [1905, 9, § 8]. A fairly general case was obtained by CouRANT and 
FRIEDRICHS [1948, 8, §§54, 118]. 
We are unable to follow the physical arguments sometimes adduced to infer (241.9) 
directly from remarks concerning the enthalpy. Indeed, if p = n, the thermodynamic pressure 
(Sect. 247) in a fluid obeying a caloric equation of state of the forme= e(1j, v), then (241.9) 
assumes the form [X+ l U2] = 0, but in more general circumstances (241. 7) bears no apparent 
relation to the enthalpy defined by (251.1)3 . Indeed, to derive (241.7) no thermodynamic 
formalism is used, and in the degree of generality maintained here, the thermodynamic 
tensions need not be defined, and hence an enthalpy need not exist. 
1 Note that the condition [J:1] = 0, which follows from (205.6) 2 in the present case, has 
been used here; cf. the remark after {241.7). 2 Contrary to the implication of McVITTIE [1949, 18, § 7]. solution of this problern requires no commitment as to the form of the energy equation in relativistic theories. McVITTIE 
obtains a special case of (241.11). in which e has a special functional form. 
3 RAYLEIGH [1873, 6, § Il]. 
39* 
612 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 242,243. 
where Dis a homogeneaus function of degree r in the components dpq• since (241A.1) then 
becomes 
e(e-ä)=htp+eq+rD. (241A.3) 
This result is an equation of balance ( Sect. 1 57) : If we set ). == e- a, then h is the efflux 
of ). and e q + r D is the supply of ).. The function D is called a dissipation function. This 
same result, with D == o, holds a fortiori when the dissipative stresses vanish. 
Thus it is clear that energy equations of the type encountered in classical elasticity, 
hydrodynamics, and thermal conduction, while consistent with the general scheme of energy 
balance, result only from the special assumptions peculiar to those disciplines and would be 
false guides in any general approach to energetic theory. 
242. Energy impulse. Equations for energy impulse may be gained by considerations parallel to those of Sect. 198 and Sect. 206, using the results of Sect.194. 
Apparently, however, this has never been done, and when we set about it, we 
find an unexpected complication. Suppose a stress impulse given by the tensor iP' 
on a boundary .9 gives rise to a velocity im pulse -{ .ip}· Then there certainly 
results an energy impulse on Y, but it is not~ iP' {.ip} da,. Indeed, since iP' da, 
[/' 
is a diflerence of momenta, while -{ .ip} is a difference of velocities, the difference 
of energies resulting will not in general bear any simple relation either to i or 
to {x}. 
Thus the causes of energy impulse in general we cannot easily separate into 
a purely energetic portion plus a portion arising from the impulses of velocity, 
momentum, and stress. In full generality we have 
(242.1) 
where k and n are the total influx and the total supply of energy impulse, but for 
the reasons given above we cannot generally write k and n partially in terms of i, 
s, and {x}, and thus analysis parallel to that leading from (241.3) to (241.4) 
is not possible. 
An exception is the case when the motion is generated from rest, for then 
we have -{ x }- = i:, {e ;i:} = e i:, and in the non-polar case 
kP = f iqP .iq + OkP, n = f sq .iq + 0n, (242.2) 
where 0k and 0n are the non-mechanical influx and supply of energy impulse. 
In this case (242.1) may be reduced by use of (206.1), so that 
(242.3) 
243. Balance of energy in a heterogeneaus medium 1• To discuss the transfer 
of energy in a mixture, we employ the formalism of Sect. 158, and we proceed 
1 Equations of the type (243.1). (243.2), and (243.3), with special forms for eme and m 
arise in MAXWELL's kinetic theory of mixtures of monatomic gases [1867, 2, pp. 47-49]. 
There, however, it is customary to define all quantities in terms of molecular motion relative 
to :i:, not to i-m; thus the partial heat flux vector qm of HIRSCHFELDER, CuRnss and BIRD 
[1954, 9, Eq. (7.2-25)] is not to be identified with our -hm but rather, subject to the 
special assumptions of the kinetic theory, with the negative of the whole expression in brackets 
on the right-hand side of (243.2). Our ef'm includes as a special case what CHAPMAN and 
CowLING [1939, 6, § 8.1] denote by nm L1 Em- Cm · nm L1 mm Cm; our ee, as defined by (243.1), 
- ~ - includes their nE, our Eq. (243.6) corresponds to the sum of their equations L nmLl mm Cm = 0 ~ _ m=I 
and L n'MLl Em = o, etc. 
m=l 
The continuum theory, while more general and simpler in concept, developed only later, 
imperfectly, and apparently in oblivion of what had been done long before in the kinetic theory. 
Differential equations for the internal energy of a mixture of continua have been given 
Sect. 243. Balance of energy in a heterogeneaus medium. 613 
as in Sects. 159 and 215. Each constituent m has its own partial internal energy e'll 
and is subject to flux of energy h 111 and supply of energy q111 • The total internal 
energy e is the sum of the partial internal energies plus the kinetic energies of 
diffusion: 
R 
e= L c'1!(e'1!+-!u~). 111=1 
(243-1) 
The total flux of energy h arises from three sources: The constituent non-mechanical fluxes of energy h'Jl, the rates of working of the partial stresses against diffusion, and the fluxes of total constituent energies by diffusion: 
(243.2) 
The total energy of the constituent m need not be balanced in itself, as 
energy may be transferred from one constituent to another. Thus, restricting attention to the non-polar case, so that ~"' = t;tk, we define the supply of energy e~1 by 
(243-3) 
the condition e111 = 0 is then necessary and sufficient that the energy of the constituent m be in balance by itself. 
for various special cases and under various special hypotheses by REYNOLDS [1903, 15, § 39]. 
}AUMANN [1911, 7, §IV], HEUN [1913, 4, § 24c], LOHR [1917, 5, Eqs. (108), (109)] [1924, 10], 
VAN MIEGHEM [1935, 9, § 2], MEISSNER [1938, 7, § 3], EcKART [1940, 8, p. 272], MEIXNER 
[1941, 2, Eq. (12)] [1943, 2, Eq. (2,8)], VERSCHAFFELT [1942, 14, §§ 15-16] [1942, 15, 
§§ 7-8], PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. VIII, § 3], KIRKWOOD and CRAWFORD [1952, 12, 
Eqs. (12) and (18)], and later writers. These authors write down their differential equations 
essentially by inspection, without derh.•ing them from the equations governing the constituents, 
and without unequivocal specification of the total internal energy in terms of constituent 
energies. ECKART [1940, 8, p. 271] hinted at the definition (243.1) but in the end neglected 
the kinetic energies of diffusion; they are included by KIRKWOOD and CRAWFORD [1952, 12]. 
An equation of the form (243.3) with EIJl = 0 was proposed by LEAF [1946, 7, Eq. (14)]; from 
the kinetic theory it is clear that such an assumption is usually false. Thermodynamic writers 
often pass over mechanical aspects rather cavalierly; typically (e.g. DE GROOT [1952, 3, § 44]) 
they replace or supplement the mechanical power term t~ "'dk ". by expressions containing 
some or all of the thermodynamic power terms in (255.15). Thus it is not surprizing that 
the results do not always agree with one another and do not contain all the terms in (243.9) 
or any Counterpart of (243.6). A discussion similar to ours is given by PRIGOGINE and MAZUR 
[1951, 21, § 3] [1951, 17, § 2], but their definitions differfrom (243.1) and (243.2) in including 
terms depending on potential energy and in employing the velocities ~'l! rather than the 
diffusion velocities Ul]l; thus their definitions of e and h do not reduce to e1 and h1 when 
S't =I. Also, they do not derive any counterpart of the condition (243.6), but it may be 
implied in the equation they write down for the balance of potential energy. Cf. also the 
special case considered by NACHBAR, WILLIAMS and PENNER [1957, 10, §V]. 
Our treatment follows TRUESDELL [1957. 16, § 7]. In view of the divergences among thermodynamic writers, it appears necessary to emphasize that all results in the text stand in 
detailed consistency with their counterparts in the kinetic theory. In particular, that the 
correct energy equation for the mixture should be of just the sameform asthat forasimple 
medium, viz., (243-7), has long been known; cf., e.g., the careful derivation of HIRSCHFELDER, 
CURTISS and BIRD [1954, 9, Eqs. (7.2-49) and (7.6---7)]. The difference in results obtained 
by thermodynamic writers arises only partly from their apparent use of e1 rather than e 
(cf. our analysis in Sect. 259) but seems tobe inherently unresolvable because of their failure 
to define t and h in terms of quantities associated with the constituents. 
614 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
Summing (243.3) on ~. we obtain 
where 
.R .R ' '\' A ~{ (' 12) "k (! .wE~= 2..,. (!'l( Eil(+ 2U'll - (!'llU~kX~I- (!'l(q'l(- 'll~1 ~~1 
- (t~m- (!'llU~u~i)xk,m-
- [ht + t~m u'llm- (!'ll (EIJl + i- Ufu) utJ.k + 
+ t~':'ku'llm- [eiJl(EIJl + i- Ufu) u~J,k}, 
= e i-tkmxk,m- hk,k-
.R 
- 2::{e c~ (E~+i-ut) + u~k(e'l(x~- ttml + e~q~}, ~~1 
= (!E- tkmdkm- hk,k_ (!q-
.R 
- e ~ [c'll(E~ + i- ut) + Nru'llk], 
'll~1 
.R 
q ==:= L Cll( (q'll + f;t UIJlk) · &~1 
Sect. 244. 
(243.4) 
(243.5) 
To derive (243.4), at the first equality we have used only algebraic rearrangement, 
(158.7), and (158.11); at the second equality we have used (243.1), the fundamental 
identity (159.5), and (215.1) and (243.2); the last equality follows by (215.2). 
From (243.4) we see that a necessary and sufficient condition for the non-polar 
case of (241.4) to hold for the mixture is 
.R '\' [A A k A ( 1 2 )] .w E~+P'llu'llk+cm E~+2u~ =0. (243.6) &~1 
This result, analogous to (159.4) and (215.5), asserts that the energy supplied 
by an excess internal energy rate, plus the energy supplied by the work of the 
excess inertial forces against diffusion, plus the energy supplied by the creation 
of mass, must add up to zero for the mixture. 
Wehave shown that for the non-polar case the condition (243.6), along with 
the definitions (243.1), (243.2) and (243.5), Ieads to an energy equation of the 
form 
(243.7) 
for the mixture. For later use we require this same equation put in terms of 
the inner parts Er, hr, and qr of E, h, and q: 
.R 
er= LC~E~, 
'll~1 
.R 
qr == L c~ q~. ~1~1 
(243.8) 
Either by transforming (243.7) or by summing (243.3) on ~ and then using 
(159.5), (215.7), and (243.6), we obtain 
(!Er=t1m dkm + .R 1 t~m U~:,m + (h1- 'll~ .R 1 (!& E~ u~) ,k + I 
+ e qr - e L [Pt u2tk + c~. t Ufu]' 'll~1 
(243.9) 
where tr is defined by (215 .6). 
244. Remarks on the generat energy balance. The interconvertibility of heat 
and ~ mechanical work is expressed only indirectly in (241.4) and (241.6), or, for 
Sect. 245. Thermostatics and thermodynamics. 615 
that matter, in the basic equation (240.1). In the interpretation, the variables 
:0, h, q, and s are to be associated at least in part with thermal phenomena, yet 
they are measured in mechanical units. In fact, 
dim :0 = dim ~ = [M L 2 T-3], l 
dim s = dimi2 = [L 2 T-2], 
dim h = [M T-3], dim q = [L q-3]. 
(244.1) 
In order that h may be connected with a temperature gradient, for example, 
the mechanical equivalent of heat must be used. Only in its tacit assumption, 
necessary for its intended applications, that all thermo-energetic phenomena may 
be measured in mechanical units, does the energy balancebring in any new physical 
idea beyond those used in pure mechanics. 
Indeed, with an equation such as (241.4) we appear to be further from solving 
any problems concerning energy than we were in Sect. 217. To secure balance 
of energy, we have introduced three new quantities s, h, and q, and only one 
condition connecting them. In any given motion, (241.4) may be used for each 
particle X as a definition of s to within an additive constant, as a definition of h 
to within an arbitrary solenoidal field, or as a definition of q, when two of 
these quantities are assigned arbitrarily. But this is not the way in which 
(241.4) is used in practice. Rather, its new variables correspond to physical 
ideas, and the simple structure set up in this subchapter serves as a framework 
(cf. Sect. 6) within which more special considerations concerning changes of 
energy may conveniently be expressed. Some of these special assumptions will 
be discussed in the remainder of the chapter. 
II. Entropy. 
a) The caloric equation of state. 
245. Thermostatics and thermodynamics. The reader who has no preconception of thermodynamics may pass over this section, entering at once into the 
theory in Sect. 246. 
1. The classical difficulties. Thermostatics, which even now is usually called 
thermodynamics, has an unfortunate history and an unfortunate tradition. As 
compared with the older science of mechanics and the younger science of electromagnetism, its mathematical structure is meager. Though claims for its breadth 
of application are often extravagant, the examples from which its principles 
usually are inferred are most special, and extensive mathematical developments 
based on fundamental equations, such as typify mechanics and electromagnetism, 
are wanting. The logical standards acceptable in thermostatics fail to meet the 
criteria of most other branches of physics; books and papers concerning it contain 
a high proportion of descriptive matter to equations and results. The obscurity 
of its concepts is witnessed by the many attempts, made alike by engineers, 
physicists, and mathematicians and continuing today in greater number, to 
reformulate them and to set the house of thermostatics in order. 
The difficulty of the subject lies partly in its task of comparing different 
equilibria without describing the intermediate states whereby bodies may reach 
equilibrium. At the outset, the reader is told to imagine a system changing so 
slowly as to be in equilibrium at all times, for such paradoxical "quasistatic 
processes" are to furnish the main subject of the theory. The critical student 
must long have realized that some kind of linearization is involved; in the shadows 
behind classical thermostatics must stand a better theory including motion and 
616 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 245. 
change of motion, and from this theory the classical quasistatic process should 
result when kinetic energy, diffusion, and inhomogeneity are neglected. In addition to quasistatic or "reversible" processes, the classical theory attempts to 
deal with certain "irreversible" processes, but rather than describing their course 
in its formal structure, it merely lays down prohibitions regarding their outcomes1• 
Here too the traditional obscurities arise from an incomplete description 2 of the 
phenomena the theory is envisioned as representing. 
2. "Irreversible" thermodynamics. Both these difficulties are cleared by a 
simple expedient: The basic equations of classical thermostatics are applied to 
elements of volume in a moving material, or in a mixture of materials. This 
device of a local thermostatic state 3, when employed in conjunction with the 
general principle of energy given in Subchapter I, leads to a theory in which 
equilibrium is but a special case of motion and change, and through which many 
processes considered "irreversible" in thermostatics are described easily and 
naturally, at least in principle. This theory, usually called "irreversible thermodynamics ", we prefer to call simply thermodynamics 4• 
That so great a difference in scope can result from transferring long familiar ideas to 
a local scale should not be surprizing. It is typical of the success of the jield viewpoint (cf. 
Sect. 2). Similarly, problems of fluid motion which could be treated only grossly by the 
mechanics of "bodies" (i.e., mass-points) were solved successfully 200 years ago by hydrodynamics, which applied the principles of mechanics to the continuous field. What is surprizing is that, granted occasional exceptions, the dynamical theory of heat should have 
remained for nearly a century in a stage of dElvelopment analogaus to the theory of masspoints in mechanics. 
Even though both theories employ parallel concepts on different scales, beyond 
the first few steps we cannot expect simply to read off results for the thermodynamic field from counterparts in thermostatics, any more than hydrodynamics 
can be read off from mass-point mechanics. 
). The concept of entropy. Much of the wordiness of the traditional presentation grows from its insistence on justifying the basic assumptions by experience, 
and in particular on developing the concept of entropy in terms of heat and 
1 Cf. the remark of PARTINGTON [1949, 22, Sect. li, §51]: "The thermodynamics of 
irreversible processes is entirely qualitative and of little interest in physical chemistry." 
This remark applies to the traditional view, to which the text alludes, but not to the more 
recent studies mentioned in footnote 1, p. 618, andin Sect. 306. 
2 Cf. the remarks of DuHEM [ 1904, 2]: "La Thermodynamique ne possede pas de moyens 
qui suffisent a mettre completement en equations Je mouvement des systemes qu'elle etudie ... ", 
etc. Hence arise the peculiar difficulties of the theory of thermodynamic stability (Sects. 264 
and 265). 
3 The earliest examples are cited in Sect. 248 in connection with the thermal equation 
of state for gas flows. The first systematic treatments of the energy and entropy fields in a 
deformable medium were given by J AUMANN [1911, 7] [1918, 3] and LoHR [1917, 5] [1924, 10]; 
their work is difficult to study because its main object, the explanation of a set of linear 
constitutive equations intended to describe all physical phenomena known to the authors, 
has lost what interest it may have had (cf. Sect. 6), and from the maze of calculation, which is 
highly condensed despite its length, the reader can scarcely disengage the physical principles. 
It is clear, however, that J AUMANN and LOHR deserve great credit for realizing the nature 
and importance of the production of entropy and for being the first to derive differential 
equations for it. Cf. also the early exposition of DE DONDER [1931, 4, § 6]. 
4 A description of "irreversible thermodynamics" in classical terms would be: Valurne 
elements are assumed to suffer only reversible changes, possibly resulting in irreversible 
changes for the body as a whole. Such terms can be rather confusing, as when PRIGOGINE 
[1947, 12, Chap. IX, § 1] interprets (255.1) as an assertion that the mean motion of a mixture 
does not produce entropy and is thus a "reversible phenomenon", even if accompanied by 
viscosity, diffusion, and the conduction of heat. We prefer to cleave to equations and eschew 
verbalisms. 
Sect. 245. Thermostatics and thermodynamics. 617 
temperature 1• In the more highly developed parts of theoretical physics, such 
discussions do not ordinarily form a part of a treatise on the theory itself, but 
belong rather to works on the physical foundations and on the connection between theory and experiment. While it is true that the physics laboratory does 
not contain an entropy meter, the concept of entropy is not more difficult than 
some others, such as electric displacement 2 ; even temperature and mass prove 
elusive to critical inquiry. 
A glance at the equations of the theory, once the preliminary words are past, 
shows that thermodynamics is the science of entropy. This is true even more of 
recent works on irreversible processes than of the classics on thermostatics. 
4. The nature and scope of our presentation. An axiomatic development, deriving entropy from heat and temperature, would be desirable, but in our opinion 
there exists no acceptable treatment of this kind 3. As in the other domains 
presented in this treatise, we are content to explain the formal structure of the 
theory as it is practised (cf. Sects. 3, 196). Thus we take entropy as the primitive 
concept in terms of which thermodynamics is constructed 4• Surely, any future 
axiomatic treatment if successful will lead to the same equations as those from 
which our presentation begins. For readers who prefer arguments concerning 
steam engines, we cite the original memoirs on thermostatics 5• Neither do we 
1 Hence results an apologetic tonein many recent works on "irreversible thermodynamics ", 
which often find it necessary to discuss whether or not it is "meaningful" to speak of temperature and entropy for systems not in equilibrium. Often included are arguments from 
statistical mechanics. While a rigorous development of equations governing entropy and 
temperature from general statistical mechanics would be most illuminating (cf. Sect. 1), 
all attempts thus far rest on formal approximation procedures in the kinetic theory of monatomic gases or on the theory of small perturbations from statistical equilibrium, so that 
their validity is confined a fortiori to physical situations far less general than those which 
the results they claim to derive are intended to represent. In any case, it is not right to single 
out thermodynamics as the only branch of physics where such arguments are in order. Rather, 
the development of field theories from statistical theories constitutes a general program of 
inquiry (cf. Sect. S). Such a program is outside the scope of the present treatise, the 
purpose of which is to explain the field theories as such. 2 The parallel is good. Entropy cannot be measured except in terms of other quantities, 
such as energy and temperature; the same is true of dielectric displacement, but the constitutive assumption ~ = e E (cf. Sect. 308) is so common that we are often led to regard ~ 
as closer to experience than in reality it is. 3 Special mention must be made of the celebrated work of CARATHEODORY [1909, 3], 
[1925, 4]; cf. BORN [1921, 2], EHRENFEST-AFANASSJEWA [1925, .5], LANDE [1926, 4], MrMURA [1931, 7 and 8], IWATSUKI and MIMURA [1932, 7], }ARDETSKY [1939, 9], WHAPLES 
[1952, 24], FENYES [1952, 6]. CARATHEODORY succeeded in deriving the concepts of absolute 
temperature and of entropy from a suitable formalization of the idea of equilibrium and the 
assumption that for any state, there is an arbitrarily near state that the system cannot 
reach without work's being expended. Despite the mathematical elegance and success of this 
approach, we cannot regard it as fundamental for a theory intended to describe arbitrary 
changes of energy, where thermal equilibrium is as little to be expected as is mechanical 
equilibrium in dynamics. For thermodynamics, it is not equilibrium that is basic, but entropy production. Cf. also the criticisms expressed by LEAF [ 1944, 8, p. 94]. 4 This method is due to GrBBS [1873. 2, p. 2, footnote] [1873, 3, p. 31] [1875. I, pp. 56, 63] 
who did not attempt to justify it; it was recognized at once by MAXWELL [1875. 4, p. 195] 
and was adopted by HrLBERT [1907, 4, pp. 435-438]. Among modern authors who follow 
it, we cite EcKART [1940, 8] and MEIXNER [1941, 2, § 3] [1943, 2, § 2). 6 The traditional theory was developed by CLAPEYRON [1834, I], KELVIN [1849, 4] 
[1853, 3), CLAUSIUS [1850, I] [1854, I) [1862, J) [1865, J), REECH [1853, 2], RANKINE 
[1853. J], and F. NEUMANN [1950, 2I] (deriving from 1854 to 1855 or earlier). A particularly 
careful discussion of the dozens of assumptions, mostly tacit, on which the traditional development restswas given by DuHEM [1893, 3]. A variant system, Jargely unpublished until 1928, 
was devised by WATERSTON from 1843 onward; it is recommended and developed by 
HALDANE [1928, 3, Chap. II]. Other variants or extensions are proposed by BRONSTED 
[1940, 4 and .5] and LEAF [1944, 7]. Brief histories of thermostatics are given by MAcH 
618 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 246. 
consider it the province of any treatise on mathematical theory to explain how 
measurements testing the theory are to be made. Finally, and also in defiance 
of the tradition of the subject, we do not consider it any more appropriate here 
than in the theory of stress to work out elementary examples based on special 
assumptions. This treatise presents the generat theory of the entropy field 1 . 
The theory of entropy, like any other theory, has limitations. That there 
are many physical occurrences to which it does not apply may be taken for 
granted. To justify its inclusion in this treatise, it is enough that there are many 
physical situations to which it does apply, and even in the rather limited special 
cases now being explored its relevance seems to be waxing. 
246. Entropy 2 • At a given place and time in a body, let there be given f 
parameters Va which are regarded as influencing the internal energy e. The 
assignment of these parameters 3 is made a priori; their totality is the thermodynamic substate. The physical dimensions of the Va are made up of mechanical 
and electromagnetic units but are otherwise arbitrary. The most familiar case 
is when the thermodynamic substate consists in a single scalar parameter, the 
specific volume v. In another common example, the Va are the nine deformation 
gradients x7a from a material reference state. In still another, they are the densities or the concentrations of the constituents of a mixture. For all general 
[1896, 3, pp. 269-301], DUHEM [1903, 10], CALLENDER [1910, 3, §§ 20-23], and PARTINGTON [1949, 25, Part Il, §§ 23-37] [1952, 15]. 
In the system of DuHEM [1893,1, Eqs. (43bis) and (56)], [1911, 4, Chap. XIV, §§ 1-2], 
the caloric equation of state (246.1) is regarded as only approximate; DuHEM adds a mutual 
internal energy resulting from the interaction of all pairs of elements of mass. 
The system of FINK will be described in Sect. 253. 
Herewe mention the system of REIK [1953. 26] [1954. 19], which replaces the traditional 
"second law" by an axiom governing the time change of entropy. This axiom seems to us 
tobe a constitutive relation, generalizing the conventionallinear ones (cf. the next footnote), 
and thus we do not attempt to present REIK's theory here. We recognize the difficulty of 
drawing a firm distinction: Eq. (246.1), on which the rest of the chapter is founded, is itself, 
in a strict view, a constitutive equation, and the chapter should stop after Sect. 244. 1 The majority of recent studies on "irreversible thermodynamics" rest on the special 
constitutive assumption (cf. Sect. 7) that the affinities arelinear functions of the fluxes. In 
the present treatise, these special developments would be as inappropriate as classical linear 
elasticity. The Iiterature is too extensive to cite, but we mention the expositians of PRIGOGINE [1947, 12], HAASE [1951, 11], DE GROOT [1952, 3] and MEIXNER and REIK, this 
Encyclopedia, Vol. III/2. Although special cases of such linear relations are old, apparently 
the first proposal of a general theory was made by DE DoNDER [ 1938, 3]. While great 
emphasis is currently laid upon the so-called "Onsager relations ", we are unable to see 
in them, at least for the present, anything more than an indication of a special choice of variables; cf. CoLEMAN and TRUESDELL [ 1960, 1 A]. Future analysis may show that they result 
by linearization from some as yet undiscovered general principle of invariance. 
For the now generally accepted approach to the theory of the entropy field, see the 
SUmmary by DE GROOT [1953, 9]. 2 Since the developments of Sects. 246-249 are parallel to those of classical thermostatics, we do not cite referehces beyond those for Sect. 245. except toremarkthat the early 
papers concern only the case f = 1, corresponding developments for equations of state with 
arbitrarily many variables having been given by GIBBS [187 5. 1], SCHILLER [1879. 4] [1894, 8], 
HELMHOLTZ [1882, 2, § 1], DuHEM [1886, 2, Part II, Chap. II] [1894. 2] [1891, 2], and 
OuMOFF [1895. 3]. Some of the results of GIBBS are special in that they rest upon a condition 
of homogeneity (Sect. 260). The general view of the subject is due to HELMHOLTZ: "Der 
Zustand des Systems sei durch () und eine Anzahl von passend gewählten Parametern Pa 
vollständig bestimmt." Some of the identities are derived anew and interpreted in linear 
thermo-elastic contexts by TING and Lr [1957. 14]. 
That X may enter the equations of state, so that the thermodynamic behavior of one 
particle may differ from that of another, was noted by HuGONIOT [1885, 4] and emphasized 
by DUHEM [1901, 7, Part II, Chap. IV, § 1]. 3 In classical thermostatics they are often divided into two classes, called "extensive" 
and "intensive", but this distinction is not necessary here. See, however, Sect. 260. 
Sect. 246. Entropy. 619 
developments, the parameters Va are left unspecified. They are tensor fields of 
arbitrary order, functions of place ~ and timet, or, if we prefer, functions of time 
for each particle X. 
In following the more recent custom of the subject, where, except in the case 
of fluids, the variables Va are arbitrary, we feel compelled to caution the reader 
that the physical meaning of the results is likewise left uncertain. Results depending only on the possibility of differentiation are in the main rather insensitive 
to the choice of variables, but results following from inversion of functional 
relations are applicable, in most cases, only to particular choices of the variables va 
in any given physical system. Our aim here is to present certain mathematical 
features common to all the simpler thermodynamic theories. Compared to the 
contents of the other chapters of this treatise, the matter here is not concrete; 
in a satisfactory treatment, the variables va should be identified with definite 
physical quantities, as they always were in the sturlies of GIBBS. 
We have said that the thermodynamic substate is regarded as influencing e. 
The basic assumption of thermodynamics is: The substate plus a single further 
dimensionally independent scalar parameter sulfices to determine e, independently 
of time, place, motion, and stress. That is, we assume that it is possible to assign 
a priori a function f such that 
e = f('fJ, v1 , v2 , •• • , vr. X) = e('fJ, v, X). (246.1) 
The parameter 'fJ is called the specific entropy 1• Its physical dimension, postulated 
to be independent of [MJ, [L ], [T] and the electromagnetic units, is traditionally left unnamed, but the dimension given by 
dim e [L 2 r-2] 
[G] = dim 7J = -dim 7J (246.2) 
is called the dimension of temperature. 
In any given motion, of course we have e =g(X, t). In a different motion, 
a like functional relation of different form, e =h(X, t), will hold. The first 
implication of the postulate (246.1) is that we can determine e without knowing 
the particular motion occurring, and without regard to the time. In other words, 
the value of the internal energy can be ascertained from information which is 
static and universal. This information consists in 
1. The value of the substate, v. 
2. The value of the entropy, 'f/· 
3· The functionalform of the relation (246.1). 
Thus the role of entropy is that of a specifying parameter. The mechanical and 
electromagnetic information expressed by the substate is in itself not enough, 
but, for any given substance, the value of the one additional quantity 'fJ suffices 
to yield the internal energy of each particle, whatever the motion it is undergoing or has undergone 2• Adjoining the entropy 'fJ to the substate v, we obtain the 
1 Entropy is to be identified with the "calorique" of CARNOT (1824). While used by 
others, notably by RANKINE (1854), its distinction from the caloric of CLAPEYRON and earlier 
writers was emphasized by CLAusrus, who invented the name [1865, 1, § 14]. That thermodynamics is, at bottom, the science of entropy was first made clear by the researches of 
GIBBS (1875). 2 This striking property of entropy results only from the field viewpoint. Typically of 
field theories, the greater generality obtained by introducing a field which may vary from 
point to point is gained at the cost of closeness to experiment. HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 107] 
remarked that experimental verification of equations of state for !arge masses in equilibrium 
gives no indication whatever that local equations of state hold in deforming media. As in 
any other field theory, the experimental justification must result indirectly by comparing 
the solution of specific problems with measurements. 
620 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 246. 
thermodynamic state: 1], v. The relation (246.1) is the caloric equation of state. 
Choice of the form of f in (246.1) defines different thermodynamic substances. 
When X does not appear in (246.1), the substance is thermodynamically homogeneous. In the present treatise, the form of the caloric equation of state is left 
arbitrary, except for some inequalities to be laid down in Sects. 263 and 265. 
The meaning of (246.1) is most easily seen from Gibbs' diagram1, where e 
is represented by a height over the space of thermodynamic states. For the case 
when f=1, such a diagram is shown in Fig. 43. The relation {246.1) is then represented by an energy surface, whose form is fixed once and for all for each 
V I 
v*, TJ* 
Fig. 43. GIBas' diagram. 
substance considered. Suppose we have a 
motion in which a particle X is carried from 
a state v, 17 at timet to a second state v*, TJ* 
at timet*. During the motion, e, v, and 'fJ will 
vary: e =e(t), v =v(t), 'fJ =TJ(t). By (246.1), 
the motion in space is mapped onto a curve 
on the energy surface, and the changes in 
energy and thermodynamic state during the 
motion must be consistent with this fact. Conversely, however, the energy surface does not 
determine the motion, and many different 
motions may be mapped onto the same curve 
on the energy surface. Moreover, if two motions 
carry the particle from the state v, 'fJ to the state 
v*, TJ* by different paths on the energy surface and over different intervals of time, 
the energy increments are the same, being determined by the form of the energy 
surface. 
The dimensional independence of 'fJ fumishes the avenue by which thermal 
phenomena are to be connected with mechanical and electromagnetic actions. 
Were it not for this dimensional independence, 'fJ would be but another parameter in the set of Va. An essential part of the physical content of the caloric 
equation of state is that thermal information must be added to mechanical and 
electromagnetic information if we are to determine the internal energy without knowing the motion. 
Since e and 'fJ are dimensionally independent, any relation between them 
must involve constants e0 and 'fJo having the same dimensions as e and 'fJ, respectively. Thus the caloric equation of state {246.1) must really be of the form 
.!____ = t (l, v, x). ~>o fJo (246.3) 
Dimensional invariance imposes some restriction upon the manner in which v 
enters (246.3) also, but until the physical dimensions of the Va have been rendered 
explicit, nothing definite can be concluded. Even after the introduction of reduced 
variables, it is not clear what geometric structure, if any, is to be adduced for 
the thermodynamic space of points B-TJ-V. In particular, there is no reason 
to think of it as metric. But until the space itself is fully defined, we are at a 
loss to know what properties of the energy surface can. have physical significance 
for a given substance, apart from the accidents of its representation 2• Invariance 
requirements for thermodynamics have never been established. 
1 The method of GIBBS [1873, 3, pp. 33-34] was adopted and made known by MAxWELL [1875. 4, PP· 195-208]. 2 Cf. the remarks of GIBBS [1873. 3, pp. 34-35] and L. BRILLOUIN [1938, 2, Chap. I, 
§§VIII-IX]. 
Sect. 247. Temperature and thermodynamic tensions. 621 
247. Temperature and thermodynamic tensions. The temperature () and the 
thermodynamic tensions Ta are defined from (246.1) by 
(247.1) 
Hence for any change whatever in the thermodynamic state of a given particle X 
we have1 
! 
ds = Odrj + LTadva. 
a=l 
(247.2) 
The temperature and the tensions are the slopes of the curves of intersection 
of the energy surface with planes parallel to the co-ordinate planes in the diagram 
of Sect. 246. The temperature measures the sensitivity of energy to changes 
in entropy; the tensions, to changes in the corresponding parameters. When 
v1 is the specific volume, - T 1 is called the thermodynamic pressure, :n:. In the 
case of a homogeneaus mixture, when the substate includes both the total 
volume and the masses of the constituents, and when the caloric equation of 
state is taken as referring to the whole mass, then the tension Ta corresponding 
to the mass of the constituent 58 is called its chemical potential 2, ,u~ (cf. Sect. 
260). When Va is the deformation gradient x~,.. we may set ,Tt"- Ta/eo and 
obtain a double vector of elastic stress analogous to (218.6). See Sects. 25 5 to 
256A for development of the properties of these coefficients. 
In all cases, from (247.1) and (246.2) follow 
dim () = [8], . [L2 r-2J d1m Ta = -d-. --. Imva (247.3) 
Thus temperature is dimensionally independent from the thermodynamic tensions. 
Also, from (247.1) and (246.1) it is immediate that 
() = () (rJ, v), (247.4) 
The temperature and the tensions are functions of the thermodynamic state 3• 
Since (247.2), being the result of differentiating a scalar relation with fixed X, 
is valid for all paths on the energy surface for a given particle, as a special case 
it is valid along the curve onto which is mapped the actual motion of the particle X. Hence 
! 
e = ()i; + L TaVa. (247.5) 
a=l 
1 A special equation of this kindwas derived by GIBBS in bis first work [1873. 2, Eq. (4)] 
but is taken as the starting point of bis later work [1873. 3, Eq. (1)] [1875. 1, Eq. (12)] and 
hence is often called "the GIBBS equation ". For references to related earlier work, see Sect. 248. 
2 GIBBS [1875. 1, p. 63]. 3 The temperature is easier to interpret physically than is the entropy, and for this 
reason most treatments of thermodynamics prefer to take the temperature as a primitive 
concept and then introduce the entropy as a defined concept. We have remarked upon this 
in Sect. 245, No. 4, and further remarks are given in Sect. 250. Our reasons for preferring 
the present course are two: ( 1) it is formally much simpler, and (2) in our opinion no existing 
treatment along classical lines is logically clear. A possible formal alternative would be to 
take free energy 1p rather than internal energy e as primitive, define TJ through (251.4)3 , then 
define e through (251.1) 2 , but to us this seems indirect and more difficult to motivate. This 
same criticism applies to the work of DuHEM [1893, 1] [1911, 4] who always started from the 
free enthalpy {;", taken as a function of 8 and the substate. 
622 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
For arbitrary changes, however, we have 
f 
Tt 06 = () Tt OTJ + a-s '\' 
ia Tt OVa + axa. 
oe Tt' axa. l 
f 
e,k = Oru + L ia Va,k + a~a. x~k· a=l 
Sect. 247. 
(247.6) 
In a homogeneaus material, the last terms in these expressions vanish. 
We lay down an assumption of regularity: All thermodynamic functional 
relations are differentiable as many times as needed and are invertible to yield 
any one variable as a function of the others. The caution stated when the substate v was introduced in Sect. 246 must be borne constantly in mind: a strong 
restriction not only on the functional forms admissible for the caloric equation 
of state (246.1) but also on the choice of the variables Va is implied; in particular, 
it is thus assumed that various partial derivatives occurring are of one sign. While 
some related inequalities will be derived in Sect. 265, an adequate analysis of 
the nature of equations of state and of the singularities they may possess is 
not available. 
We lay down also a notation for partial derivatives: A subscript denotes the 
variables held constant, and 
(247.7) 
Moreover, we agree to hold X constant in all differentiations unless the contrary 
is noted explicitly. In this notation, (247.1) reads 
(247.8) 
In all such expressions it is understood that the quantity being differentiated 
is regarded as a function only of X and of the variables actually written in the 
denominator and the subscripts. 
Rates of change subject to the condition 'YJ = const are called isentropic. Thus 
the thermodynamic tensions are the rates of change of the internal energy in 
isentropic changes of the substate. Other isentropic rates are defined by 1 
( 07:a) <!>ab- OVb q,ub' (247.9) 
As a consequence of the assumption of smoothness, we may invert (246.1) 
and obtain 'YJ = 'YJ (s, v). Hence 
f 
d'YJ = (:~lds+ t;):~J. dva, l 
(247.10) 
= (:~t[()d'YJ+ t/adva] + at):~J,uadva. 
Equating coefficients of differentials yields 
(247.11) 
1 When v1 =V, we have v2 cjl11 = (onfoe) 11 = yU2 , where V0 is the Laplacean speed of sound. 
Cf. (297-13). 
Sect. 248. Thermal equations of state. 623 
248. Thermal equations of state. From the assumption of smoothness it follows also that we may invert (247.1) 1 and obtain 
1J = 'YJ (0, v). (248.i) 
Substituting this into (246.1) yields a functional relation of the form 
e = e(O,v). (248.2) 
But also we may substitute (248.1) into (247.4) 2 and obtain 
Ta= Ta (0, v). (248.3) 
Similarly, 
Va = Va (0, T) · (248.4) 
The relations (248.)) and (248.4) are the thermal equations of state 1• They 
are conveniently represented by surfaces over the subspace 0-v; a set of such 
surfaces may be called Euler's diagrams for the particle or the subspace 2• 
The following coefficients may be calculated from the thermal equations of 
state: 
~ - ( ~~a )T • ßa = ( ~~a )., • ~ab = ( ::: \,.,b V ab = ( ::; )o,Tb • (248.5) 
so that 
l f 
dva=LVabdTb+ocadO, dTa=L~abdvb+ßadO. (248.6) b~l b~l 
Since the coefficients (248.5) are rates of change of measurable quantities, they 
are useful for inferring the forms of the thermal equations of state by experiment. 
When v1 is the specific volume, oc1fv 1 is called the coeflicient of thermal expansion 
or isobaric compressibility, -v11fv1 is called the isothermal compressibility, and 
-ß1 is called the Pressure coeflicient. Th(coefficient((248.5) are related by the 
identities 
ßa + L 
r 
~abOCb = 0, OCa + L 
r 
Vabßb = 0, 
l b~l b~l (248.7) 
LVac~cb=t5ab• L~acVcb=t5ab• c~l c~l 
As compared with the caloric equation of state, the thermal equations of 
state offer the advantage of connecting easily measurable quantities, the disadvantage of being insufficient, despite their number, to determine a11 the 
thermodynamic properties of the material. The latter statement will be proved 
in Sect. 251. 
In a theory in which entropy is not regarded as a primitive, the thermal equations of 
state are often taken as the first postulate, and from them an argument leading to the caloric 
equation of state is constructed. The heat increment ( Q), the excess of the increment of internal 
energy over thermostatic work is defined by3 
l 
(Q)==de-~Tadva. (248.8) a~l 
1 For a perfect gas in equilibrium, the thermal equation of state :n;v = A (0- 00) was 
established by combining the experimental results of BoYLE (1662) and of AMONTONS (1699), 
rediscovered many times subsequently. This equation, along with the more general equation 
n=/(0, v) and other of its special cases, was used regularly by EULER [1745, 2, Chap. I, 
Laws 3. 4, 5] [1757, 1, §§ 17-18] [1757, 2, § 21] [1757. 3, §§ 29-31] [1764, 1] [1769, 1, 
§§ 24-30, 90-108] [1771, 1, Chap. V], but did not reappear in field mechanics until the 
work of KIRCHHOFF [1868, 11], after which it quickly became universal for studies of gas 
flows. 2 EULER [1769, 1, § 28]. Cf. also GIBBS [1873, 2]. 3 Special equations ofthisform appear as derived results in the work of CLAUSIUS [1850, 
1, Eq. Ila] [1854, 1, Eq. {2)]. 
624 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 249. 
( Q) is a differential form in the variables v, 6, since both Ii and the Ta, according to this 
approach, are assumed to be known functions of these variables. In general, this differential 
form is not integrable. Special arguments and added assumptions are required in order to 
conclude that ( Q) is integrable and that an integrating factor is 1/6. Under these assumptions, entropy is defined by integrating 
d7J = (~) = ~ [dli- ±Ta dva], (248.9} 
a=l 
identical with (247.2), and the consequent theory is the same as that we have discussed in 
Sects. 247 to 248 and will develop further in the rest of this chapter. 
It is also possible to consider a theory in which the thermal equations of state hold but 
there is no entropy or at least no caloric equation of state. 
249. Thermodynamic paths. Specific heats, I. Treatmentbasedon entropy1• For 
a given particle X a tkermodynamic patk is a path 'YJ = 'YJ (Ä), v = v (Ä} in the space 
of thermodynamic states 'YJ, v. On any path P, at a given point, any differentiable 
function g of the thermodynamic state has a differential, which we may write 
as dgp. Isentropic paths are defined by 'YJ=const (Sect. 247}; isothermal paths, 
by () = const. 
The specific keat "P on the path P is defined by 
d7Jp 
"P = () (i"O . p 
(249.1) 
For an assigned path, the ratios of differentials dvapfd'YJp are assigned, and from 
(249:1), by use of (247.4}1 , results adefinite value of the specific heat. Wehave 
dim "P =dim 'YJ = (L2 T-2 9-1]. 
By (247.2) we may write 
! 
dep-1:TadVaP a=l "p= d6p (249.2} 
From the assumption of regularity in Sect. 247, we may regard e as a function 
of () and u, and thus (249.2) becomes 
(~t d6p+ ~[(~)B,u« dvap- TadVaP] l 
"P = d6p ' 
~ (!;t + tJ( :a .. -··I·:::· I (249.3) 
In particular, if the path is one on which u = const, "P is called the specific 
heat at constant substate and is written "u· Forthis quantity, (249.3) yields 2 
_ ( a11) _ ( ae) "u= () 7fii u- 7fii u' (249.4} 
Hence (249.3) becomes 
! 
"' [( ae ) ] dvaP "P = "u + L..J -a- a- Ta ~6 . a=l Va O,u P 
(249.5) 
From the assumption of regularity, we may regard v0 as expressed in the 
form (248.4). Writing ""' for the specific heat at constant tensions 3, by holding 't 
1 REECH [1853, 2, Chap. IV], for the case of a fluid. 2 CLAUSIUS [1854, 1, p. 486) for the case f = 1, HELMHOL TZ [1882, 2, § 1) for the general case. 3 DuHEM [1894. 2, Chap. IV, § 7]. 
Sect. 250. Specific heats and latent heats, II. M. BRILLOUIN's general theory. 625 
constant m (249. 5) we obtain 
"""- "u = ± [(;-) a- Ta] OC:a, a=l Va O,u 
where OC:a is defined by {248.5) 1 • 
The ratio of specific heats, 
{249.6) 
(249.7) 
is an important dimensionless scalar. It is connected with the coefficients <Pa b 
and ~ab by interesting identities which will be derived in Sect. 252. 
250. Specific heats and latent heats, II. M. BRILLOUIN's general theory. The 
theory of specific heats is much older than thermostatics, since it can be founded 
directly upon (248.8) and does not require the concept of entropy, provided not 
only the substate u but also the tensions -r be taken as quantities known a priori. 
Indeed, with no assumed functional relations connecting the variables, we may 
setl 
(Q) 
dO ' (250.1) 
where < Q> is the differential form {248.8). Similarly, the latent heats Ara and 
Ava are defined by 
f f 
e- ~ TbVb i.QL e- ~ TbVb (Q) A-ra- b=l 
Ava= 
b=l (250.2) ia d-ra ' Va dva 
In general, such specific heats and latent heats will be functions of time even 
for a given path. Definitions equivalent to these were used long prior to the 
concept of entropy and the theory of thermostatics. While they serve to record 
the results of measurements, they are too generaltobe the basis of a mathematical 
treatment. 
M. BRILLOUIN 2 proposed assumptions which, while far more general than 
those used in the preceding sections, are yet definite enough that the major classical formal properties of specific and latent heats remain valid. In order to 
represent the possibility of permanent deformation, he suggested discarding even 
the thermal equations of state, replacing them by the differential forms {248.6), 
where the coefficients '~'ab•OC:a,~ab•ßa are given functions of V, T, and e. The 
resulting differential forms in all 2 f + 1 variables v, T, () are not necessarily 
integrable. The identities (248.7) remain valid, but the interpretations {248.5) 
are correct only for the integrable case. 
The idea is easiest to picture in the case of three variables, d v = v ( v, -r, 0) d -r + IX ( v, -r, 0) d 0. 
Consider a closed loop in the -r-0 plane, described by T=-r(t), 0=0(1). As the system is 
carried through this closed cycle, the point -r, 0, v traverses a curve on the right cylinder 
whose base is the loop. This curve is obtained by integrating 
v = v(v, T(l), O(t)) i(t) + ~X(v, -r(t), 0(1)) Ö(t). (250.3) 
1 An attempt to study specific heats in something approaching this degree of generality 
was made by M. BRILLOUIN [1888, 2], who discussed possible restrictions on the dependence 
of" on the substate. 
2 [1888, 3, §§ 3, 8-9]. Our treatment is somewhat more compact and general than 
BRILLOUIN'S. BRILLOUIN also studied a generalized entropy 1)(V, T, 0) [1888, 3, §§ 12-25]. 
The criticism of BRILLOUIN's theory expressed by DuHEM [1896, 2, Introd. to Part I] refers 
to this generalized entropy, not to the developments presented above. DuHEM [ibid., Chap. I, 
§ 1] proposes a generalized free enthalpy. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 40 
626 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 250. 
If the argument v does not actually appear in v and et, as is the case when there is a thermal 
equation of state, this curve is closed, and v returns to its initial value when the loop is traversed; indeed, the only possible curve is given by the intersection of the cylinder with 
EuLER's diagram. If the form (248.6h is not integrable, however, v will not generally return 
to its initial value, and after the system is carried through the closed cycle of values of (} 
and T, a change in v will result. But all these changes are reversible to the extent that if 
a path may be traversed in one sense, it may also be traversed in the opposite sense, since 
the form (248.6h is linear and homogeneous. 
We now add the assumption that an internal energy exists, but we replace 
(248.8) by allowing the more general assumed functional relation 
B = B (t', T, fi). (250.4) 
Then from (248.6)1 follows 
(250.5) 
where the quantities Ba and Ca are arbitrary. With the choices 1 Ba=TJ- 8
8 e , 8e Va 
Ca=- -
8-, we get Ta 
f 
(Q) =a~/TadTa +x"dO, l 
= L Ava d Va + Xu d e' a~l 
where the latent heats and specific heats are given by 
Hence 
(250.6) 
(250.7) 
(250.8) 
1 By other choices of the Ba or Ca it is also possible to eliminate d (} and any f- 1 of the 
dva and dra. but the result is not illuminating except in the special case f = 1, for which 
it is given at the end of this section. 
Sect. 251. Thermodynamic potentials and transformations. 627 
a result which reduces to (249.6) when (250.5) is replaced by the more special 
assumption (248.8). From (250.7), (250.8), and (248.7) we obtain 
r r 
x .. - "" = L IXa Äva =-L ßo. Ä.To. • (250.9) 
0.=1 o.=1 
These identities express the difference of specific heats as bilinear forms in the 
thermal coefficients 1X0 , ßo. and the latent heats Ä.To, Ä.v0 . Their form is precisely 
the same for Brillouin's theory as for the classical special case when there arethermal 
equations of state. Thus if one specific heat is known, the other may be calculated 
directly from the measurable quantities defined as coefficients in the forms 
(248.6) and (250.6). Moreover, the relation (250.9) does not serve as a test for 
the existence of a thermal equation of state. 
When f = 1, we write ß for ß1 , ct for ct1 , etc., and obtain "T- "v = - ß l. = ctÄ", so that 
tke latent keats are proportional to tke differentes of specific keats, and (250.6) become 
1 1 
(Q)=- ß '"T- "v) dT + "Td0 = -;x- ("T- "v) dv + "vd0, (250.10) 
with ß + ct~ = 0, ct + ßv = 0, ~11 = 1. Also we have the alternative form 
(Q) ~ ~:d:+T :;T :; ) '' + (:: + t :; ) dT, l ct ß 
(250.11) 
Therefore 
(250.12) 
Thus when f = 1 the ratio of specific heats may be calculated from ct, ß, and the ratio dTjdv 
in a process where ( Q) = O, or, equivalently, all energy changes are balanced by thermostatic 
work. Such a process generalizes the notion of "isentropic path" introduced in Sect. 249. 
251. Thermodynamic potentials and transformations. We return to the classical theory based upon the caloric equation of state (246.1). The thermodynamic 
potentials1 are named and defined as follows: 
internal energy: e , 
free energy : 1p - e - 'Y} () , 
enthalpy: 
r 
X-e- LTa.Va, 
0.=1 
r 
free enthalpy: C - X - 'Y} () = e - 'Y} () - L Ta Va · 
They are related through the identity 
e-"P+C-x=o. 
0.=1 
(251.1) 
(251.2) 
Each of the potentials has certain specially simple properties. From (247.2) 
and (251.1} it follows that 
f f 
de = fJ d'Yj + a~f /a dva, d1p _=- 'Y} df) + a~f /a dva, l 
(251. 3) 
dx = Od'Yj- L VadTa, dC-- 'Yjdf)- L vadTa· 
0.=1 o.=l 
1 Proportional functions were introduced by MASSIEU [1869, 4 and 5] [1876, 3, §§I 
and IV], who was motivated by the desire to express all thermodynamic properties in terms 
of functions of 0, u and of 0, 't". Cf. Eqs. (251.7). The theory was elaborated by GrBBS [1875. 
1, p. 87]. Cf. also HELMHOLTZ [1882, 2, § 1]. Further comments on the interpretations of 
the potentials are made by NATANSON [1891, 4] and TREVOR [1897. 9]. 
40* 
628 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 251. 
Hence 
o =(~L· 
1] =-(::t. 
0 = (:~)T, (251.4) 
1] =- (!~t. 
the first two of these having already appeared as {247.1). From {251.1) and 
(251.4) follow the relations 
f 
u a=l Ta 'I,T {251.5) 
'P- e = 0 (::) , X-e= L Ta( :x) a,) 
C - e = 0 (~CO) + ± Ta ( !' ) a • u T a=l uTa 8,T 
From {251.3) it appears that we may use any one of the alternative sets of 
independent variables 
1], v; 0, v; 1], T; 0, T (251.6) 
and yet be able to calculate all energy changes. The functions appropriate to 
the four cases are the four potentials e, 'P· x. C. In particular, (251.4) 3 shows 
that from the equations'P='P(O, v) andC=C(O, T), theentropymaybe calculated 
as a change of free energy per unit temperature. The name free energy is appropriate for 'P because, as follows from {251.3)2 , it is the portion of the energy 
available for doing work at constant temperature. Similarly, by (251.3) 3 it 
follows that the entkalpy X is the portion of the energy which can be released 
as heat when the thermodynamic tensions are kept constant. 
When f =1, the free enthalpy is called the "Gibbs function" or "thermodynamic potential". When f>l, the usage of GIBBS, followed in most texts 
today, was somewhat different from ours. In the case when v1 is the specific 
volume v, GrBBS set 
(251.6A) 
even wken f > 1; i.e., in the enthalpy he left out of account the energy corresponding to any parameter other than v1 • This results in a different physical interpretation for X and C if f > 1; in particular, GrBBS' function C is useful in situations 
where the temperature is controlled and a uniform hydrostatic pressure is maintained while other thermostatic parameters vary. In adopting here the generalized 
enthalpy given by (251.1) 3 , not only do we seek to exploit the neater mathematical 
development which will be seen below, but also we recognize that in the general 
case in continuum mechanics the thermostatic pressure does not exist or does 
not enjoy much importance. 
An equation giving one thermodynamic variable as a function of one of the 
four sets {251.6) is said tobe afundamental equation1 iffrom it all thermodynamic variables that are not its arguments may be calculated by partial differentiation, functional inversion, and algebraic operations. In this definition, the set of 
"thermodynamic variables" is Va, Ta, 1], 0, e. Fundamental equations are 
e=e(?J,v), 'P='P(O,v), x=x(?J,T), C=C(O,T). (251.7) 
1 GIBBS [1875. 1, PP· 85-92]. 
Sect. 252. Thermodynamic identities. 629 
As will be shown in Sect. 253, an example of a thermodynamic relation which 
is not a fundamental equation is a thermal equation of state such as Ta= Ta (0, v). 
There is a formal analogy between the equations appropriate to one potential 
and those appropriate to another. Examples will be given in Sect. 252. For 
the case when f =1, HAYES1 has constructed a systematic and exhaustive method 
of permutation to obtain them all. 
252. Thermodynamic identities. From the assumption of smoothness in 
Sect. 247, we may write down the following conditions of integrability2 for the 
four differential forms (251.3): 
(252.1) 
where T" b stands for the set of all the T's except Ta and Tb. These identities are 
called Ma:xwell's relations or reciprocal relations. The expressions for cxa and ßa 
are of particular interest in showing that certain rates of change of entropy 
can be inferred from the thermal equations of state. 
When f =1, the above identities are easily expressed in terms of Jacobians. 
For example, (252.1h implies that 
o(O, TJ) o(T, v) . 
o(v,fi} o(TJ,Vf • (252.2) 
hence 3 
o(T,v) _ 1 
o(TJ, 0) - • (252.3) 
This may be regarded as a summary of all the Maxwell relations when f = 1, 
since the same procedure applied to any one of the identities (252.1) yields 
this same end product, which asserts that a mapping from the plane of 'fJ, 0 to 
the plane of T, v is area-preserving. 
Again by the assumption of smoothness, we consider both 'fJ and e as functions 
of 0 and v, by (247.2) obtaining 
OdrJ =de- ±Tadv0 , I 
= (::ta;~ + L [( ::Jo,ua- Ta] dva· 
a=l 
(252.4) 
1 [1946, 5]. Earlier SHAW [1935. 6] had given tables based on rather Jaborious calculation. 
It has Jong been noted that the relations (251.1) are contact transformations. CoRBEN 
[1949. 3] and FENYES [1952, 5] have constructed an analogy to the dynamics of mass-points, 
whereby each dynamical formula enables us to write down a thermodynamic identity, certain 
new thermodynamical quantities being thus suggested. 2 The results, when f = 1, are due to MAXWELL [1871, 5, Chap. IX] and, for the general 
case, to GIBBS [1875, 1, Eq. (272)] and DUHEM [1886, 2, Part II, Chap. II, Eq. (82)]. Cf. also 
MILLER [1897. 6]. It was NATANSON [1891, 4, §I] who first remarked that they are conditions 
of integrability. 
3 Allowing for the fact that CLAPEYRON did not distinguish properly between entropy 
and caloric, we may see nevertheless that he gave the essential content of this relation and 
of (252.1) 8 [1834. 1, §V]. 
630 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 252. 
Hence we again obtain (249.4) 2, but also1 
() (~) - (_!_!_) - T ova 6, ,.a- ova 6, ,.a a • (252.5) 
This last result enables us to express the latent heats in terms of entropy changes. 
Indeed, specializing the formulae (250.7) 3, 1 to the case when e = e (v, 0), we obtain 
Ava = 0 ( :7J ) , uVa 6,ua (252.6) 
By the Maxwell relation (252.1) 4 , these results may be put into the forms 2 
f 
Ava =- 0 ßc., ATa =- 0 L ßb Vba· (252.7) 
b=l 
While the last formulae express the latent heats in terms only of the quantities 
occuring in the differential forms (248.6), the presence of the factor 0 indicates 
that the differential properties of the entropy have been used, and in fact test 
of the relations (252.7) serves as an experimental check on the integrability of 
the form <Q>JO. 
By differentiating (252.7) 4 and using (252.5), (249.4), and (252.1h we obtain 
the following identity of CLAUSIUs 3 : 
( o.ilva) -(o~,.) --ß ----e6,. ova 6, ,.a- a · 
From (252.7)1 and (250.9) it follows that 
f 
""'- "" = - 0 L Clta ßa • a=l 
(252.8) 
(252.9) 
whereby the difference ""'-"u is given in terms of quantities obtainable from 
the thermal equations of state. For alternative forms, we use (249.7), (248.7)1 2 , 
and (252.9) to obtain ' 
0 0 f 
Y- 1 =- L ~abotnotb =- L Vabßaßb· (252.10) ~ .. a, b=l ~ .. a, b=l 
We now address ourselves to the task of finding an explicit relation between 
the coef:ficients <l>a b and m,, defined from the caloric equation of state by (247.9), 
and the coefficients ~ab and ß,, defined from the thermal equations of state 
by (248.5)s. First we write out the two Hessian matrices whose individual 
components we seek to relate: 
ll ~~~~=ll<l>ab m, llj o(u, 71) m, 0/"u ' 
o(U,7J) Vab Cltc 
118(~11 = II ot, ""joll · 
(252.11) 
where we have employed only the definitions (247.9), (248.5)1, 4 , and (249.1). 
The product of the two matrices on the left-hand side is the unit matrix; there1 CLAUSIUS (1854, 1, p. 486], when f= 1. 
2 The first of these relations, for the case when f = 1, is dueto CLAPEYRON [1834, 1, §IV], 
with the pr-oviso noted in footnote 3. p.629. It was obtained from the present theory by CLAUsrus, 
first for the case of a perfect gas [1850, 1, Eq. IV] and then more generally [1854, 1, Eq. (13a)]. 3 [1854, 1, Eq. (3)], given earlier for the case of a perfect gas [1850, 1, Eq. II]. 
Sect. 252. Thermodynamic identities. 
fore, so also is the product of those on the right-hand side. Thus 
f 
L <l>ac '~'cb + W"a IXb = Öab, 
c~l 
f 
L UJ"b 'Vb a + () 1Xa/Xu = 0, b~I 
f 
L <l>abiXb + W"ax-./0 = 0, b~I 
! 
L W"a 1Xa + Y = 1 • n~I 
where for the last identity we have used the definition (249.7). 
From (252.12) 4 we have f 
Y - 1 = - L W"a IXa. 
n~I 
Multiplying (252.12h by IXn and summing yields 
f 
x-.(y-1) =0L<!>ab1Xa1Xb, 
a,b~I 
631 
(252.12) 
(252.13) 
(252.14) 
where (252.13) has been used, while a similar process applied to (252.12) 2 yields 
f 
Y - 1 = ~u L 'V ab W"a UJ"b · 
a,b~I 
Similarly, from (252.12h and (252.12) 4 we have 
(J f -1 
Y- 1 =-L <!>ab W"aW"b. 
;e-. a, b~I 
These formulae for y-1 aretobe set alongside (252.9) and (252.10). 
(252.15) 
(252.16) 
Coming now to (252.12) 1 , we multiply by ~be and sum on 6; simplifying the 
result by use of (248.7)t, 3 and (252.1) 9 yields 
<!>ab =~ab+ W"a ßb · 
From this identity and (252.1) 8, 9 we obtain a reciprocity theorem: 
W"a ßb = UJ"b ßa • 
If we write 
then taking the determinant of (252.12}t yields 
(252.17) 
(252.18) 
(252.19) 
<!> v = -:- _= det (Ö1
ab- W"a ocb) ·] 
(252.20) 
- 1 - L W"a1Xa 
a~I 
[cf. the steps used in deriving (189.11)]. By (252.13) it follows thatl 
<I> =y$. (252.21) 
1 For the case when f=I, the identity (252.21) becomes y= (~:)j(~:) . which may 
be interpreted as a statement that in a perfect fluid, the ratio of the isentropic and isothermal 
speeds of sound is always y, whatever be the form of the equation of state e = e (TJ, v) (cf. 
Sect. 297). While this weil known result is often attributed to REECH [1853. 2, p. 414], 
he did not derive or state it, although he gave related expressions for ;e,. and ;ev. A different 
generalization is given by DuHEM [1903, 10]. 
632 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classica! Field Theories. Sect. 252. 
Looking back at (252.11)1 , we take the determinant of each side and expand 
the right-hand member according to minors of elements in the bottarn row: 
8(-r,O) Ocp f_1 
a{u, ") = -;t - <!> L <!>ab IDa lUb, ., " a,b=J 
Ocp = "[y-(y- 1)]' ... (252.22) 
= _IJ_t = _~}_! "u = () ~ "·· "..- y V' 
where we have u:>ed (252.16) and (252.21). 
The identities just derived enable information about the caloric equation of 
state to be inferred from properties of the thermal equations of state, which are 
more easily accessible to measurement. Essential use will be made of them in 
Sect. 265 in connection with the theory of stability. 
Returning to the system composed of (252.5) and (249.4) 2 , as its condition of 
compatibility we derive the following necessary and sufficient condition for the 
existence of entropy as an integral of the form <Q>fO=drJ: 
~) = l"a- () (~) =-()2 ( 8(ra/O)) . (252.23) 8va o,ua 80 u 80 u 
Many treatments of thermostatics contain arguments rendering plausible the 
validity of (252.23) as a postulate, thus enabling the concept of entropy to be 
derived from those of temperature and an internal energy assumed given by an 
equation of the form (248.2), supplemented by thermal equations of state (248.3). 
While we have developed only the identities following from use of e as a potential, the same processes Iead to corresponding identities if any one of the functions 
1p, x. C is used as the starting point. For physical applications, the function C 
is often the best suited. 
For a concrete example, consider the van der Waals gas, defined by a caloric equation 
of state (246.1) given parametrically as follows: 
e=Jc(u)du-:. 1J=Jc~u)du+Rlog(v- v), v> 0v (252.24) 
where a, R, and 0v are positive constants, and where c (u) is an arbitrary function. From 
(247.7) 1 and (249.4) we obtain at once 
0 = u, Xv = c (u) = c (0), (252.25) 
whereby physical interpretation is attached to the parameter u and the function c (u). From 
(247.7) 2 and (252.25) follows the thermal equation of state: 
RO a :TC=- T = ---~. (252.26) v- 0v v2 
By (248.5). (249.11}, (252.10}, and (252.13) we have 
ot= R ß=--R-, :rc _ ~ + 2a 0v ' v - 0v 
v2 1fl 
a 
:rc+vz 
V- 0v 
2a 
v3 ' 
1 
V=T· 
y-1 l11=---, 
ot 
R (y- 1) c(O) = x"- Xv = ~~~~~~ 2a(v- 0v) 2 
1 - RO'Ifl 
(252.27) 
Sect. 253. Thermodynamic degeneracy. 633 
The conditions of ultrastability, as shown in Sect. 265, are y > 1 and "" > 0, where 
the former is equivalent, alternatively, to v > 0 and ; > 0. Hence with c (0) assumed positive, 
a state is ultrastable for this substance if and only if R 0 > 2a (v- 0v) 2 v-3 ; neutral stability 
occurs when " >" is replaced by " = ". 
When a = 0 and 0v = 0, the van der Waals gas reduces to the ideal gas, which is a 
special case of the ideal materials to be defined in the next section. For the ideal gas, 
if c (0) = const, u is easily eliminated between (252.24h and (252.24) 2 , so that 
(252.28) 
where v0 and 1'/o are arbitrary constants connected with the zero of e and the unit of 0. All 
states are ultrastable for the ideal gas if 0 > 0, provided, of course, that "v > 0. 
253. Thermodynamic degeneracy. When f + 1 is the greatest nurober of 
independent variables occurring in any equation of state, either caloric or thermal, 
but in one of them less than f + 1 are present, the material is said to be degenerate. 
The most familiar example of a degenerate substance is one for which the equation 
of state e = e (0, v) reduces to e = e (0). Such a substance is called ideal. From 
(252.23) we read off as a necessary and sufficient condition for an ideal material 
Ta= 0 fa(v) = Oßa =- Äva' (253.1) 
where the steps follow by (248.5) 2 and (252.7h. This example establishes the 
contention just following (251.7), since thermal equations of state of the form 
(253.1) do not yield the functional form of the caloric equation of state (246.1), 
but only the restriction 
(253.2) 
For an ideal material, inversion of (253.1) yields Va=ga(t:/0) and hence by 
(248.5) 
f Tb oga 
- O(l.a =~I T o(Tb/0) = ha (v). (253-3) 
Substitution of these results into (252.9) yields 
f f 
X,.- Xu =-L OCaTa = L fa(v) ha(v) =F(v). (253.4) a~I a~I 
Thus for an ideal material the difference of specific heats, besides enjoying the 
special expression (253.4)1 , is a function of the substate only1 . For an ideal 
material the identity (248.7h becomes a differential equation for determining ßa 
when all the functions - Orxb or hb (v) are known: 
f oßa O.l:a-rxb+ßa=O. (253-5) b~I Vb 
A second familiar degenerate material is one in which the thermodynamic 
tensions are determinate from the thermodynamic substate alone, and conversely. 
1 For an ideal gas, rv = - R 0, so that a. = - R/r and ß = - Rfv, and (253.4) reduces to 
"T-"v = R [cf. (252.27) 8]. While this celebrated relation is often named after MAYER, the 
only possibly related specific statement we have been able to find in his paper [1842, 2, 
p. 240] is the unproved assertion, " ... findet man die Senkung einer ein Gas comprimirenden 
Quecksilbersäule gleich der durch die Compression entbundenen Wärmemenge ... ". Even 
the generaus interpretation of MACH [ 1896, 3, pp. 247- 250], who finds MAYER "so unzweifelhaft klar ... , daß ein Mißverständnis nicht möglich ist," does not impute to him the relation 
in question, which seems tobe due in fact to CLAusrus [1850, 1, Eq. (10a)]. 
634 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 254. 
Such a material, characterized by the relations 
{253.6) 
is called piezotropic. From (252.1) 1 follows the necessary and sufficient condition 
0=0('YJ)· In other words, the caloric equation of state {246.1) in the piezotropic 
case reduces to1 
e = eo ('YJ) + eu (v), (253-7) 
so that the internal energy may be split into a thermalportioneo and a substantial 
portion eu. For the former, by (249.4) we obtain 
eo=f~ud(), {253.8) 
where ~u=~u (()). By {248.5) and {247.9) we obtain as alternative necessary and 
sufficient conditions for a piezotropic material 
ota=O, ßa=O, Wa=O ~ab=<l>ab· {253.9) 
From (249.10), or alternatively from (252.10) or any of Eqs. (252.13) to (252.16), 
follows 
y =1, {253.10) 
this condition being necessary but not sufficient unless f = 1. 
An interesting question regarding apparent degeneracy has been raised by FINK 2 . In 
all the formal developments of thermodynamics it is assumed that the f parameters va are 
sufficient to describe the physical body under consideration. If this is not so, the theory 
may yet be sufficient to describe some, though not all, of the physical behavior of the body. 
To see the effect of neglecting the additional parameters necessary for a complete description, 
we consider the theory based on 
e = f(rJ, V 10 V2 , ••• , Vf, Vf+l• ••• , Vf+m) (25).11) 
as exact, and we compare the exact results with those which result from treating the material 
as if it were degenerate: 
(253.12) 
where A 1 , ••• , Am are constants. If f did not in fact depend on its last m arguments, the 
material would be really degenerate and the results obtained from (253.12) exact. Since, 
by assumption, e does depend on these arguments, quantities such as (J and r 1 , ••. , Tf 
calculated from (253.12) will depend on the constants A 10 • •• , Am. That is, different behavior 
as an apparently degenerate material may correspond to different values of the unknown 
constants A 1 , •.. ,Am. 
254. Heterogeneous media I. Compatibility of an equation of state for the 
mixture with equations of state for the constituents. We now divide the parameters v into two groups: the set of individual densities e21 and the set of additional 
parameters w 1 , .•• , w1, independent of the densities. We assume that each constituent has its own partial entropy 'YJ~r and its own caloric equation of state 
~=1,2, ... ,sr. (254.1) 
We now define the total specific inner energy er and the total specific entropy 'YJ 
of the mixture: 
5l 
er L c~re'H, 'H=1 
1 COURANT and FRIEDRICHS [1948, 8, § 3]. 
5l 
'YJ = L C'H'YJ~l· ~1=1 
(254.2) 
2 [1947, 5] [1948, 11] [1949, 10] [1951, 6]. Most of FINK's work considers the effect of 
adding one additional parameter in the usual thermostatic theory for fluids so as to describe 
metastable states, etc. 
Sect. 254. Heterogeneous media I. 635 
By (254.1) and the definition (254.2)1 , which was given earlier as (243.8)1 , E1 is 
defined as a function of all the 1J'11, all the em, and the set w. It is then a definite 
mathematical problern to find conditions under which Er depends on the 1J'D. only 
through the linear combination 1J defined by (254.2) 2• Thus no thermodynamic 
arguments, but only Straightforward use of the theory of functional dependence, 
is required to determine whether or not the caloric equations of state (254.1) 
for the constituents imply a caloric equation for the mixture: 
(254.3) 
Indeed, a necessary and sufficient condition for this functional dependence 
is the vanishing of the following J acobians: 
o(er·11· 1!1• ... , 1!5\•(1)1• ... ,w,) 
0(1j1•1IB• f!l• ... , f!ft• (1)1• ... , Wf) ',',' 
o(e1•11• (!1, ... , (!ft,Wp ... ,wf) 
0(1j1•1/s•1IJ• f!2• "., f!ft• W1, ... , WrJ '' ''' 
iJ(ei•1/• f!1• .. . , f!ft• W1, .. . , Wr) 
0(111•112• 1!1• "., 1!5\•1/a• "., Wr) ' ... , 
(254.4) 
Since the variables 171• ... , 1JR• e1, ... , eft, w1, ... , Wr are independent, the only 
members of the above set of determinants that are not zero by definition are 
those of the first line, which reduce to 
8(e1.1j) 
F(?h.1js), • .. , (254.5) 
where e 1 , ••. , eR, w 1 , ••. , w, are held constant. If we set 
(254.6) 
for the temperature of the constituent ~. the determinants (254.5) may be expressed 
in the forms 
c1 c3 (01 -03), ... ,} 
c2 c3 (02 - 03 ), ... . 
(254.7) 
Therefore we have the following local theorem1 : I f each constituent of a mixture 
has its own caloric equation of state (254.1), and if the total inner energy E1 and 
total entropy 1J of the mixture are defined by (254.2), then in order that there be a 
caloric equation of state (254.3), it is necessary and sutficient that at each place 
and time the constituents fall into two categories: 
1. ~ constituents have the same temperature: 
(254.8) 
1 TRUESDELL [1957. 16, § 10]. The necessity of (254.8) and (254.9) is easily established 
alternatively as follows: from (254.2) 2 and (254.3) we have 
( --
oe1 ) -cm- (OBI) . o11m p,..,- a11 p, ."· 
but by (254.2h 
~) _ cm (oem) 011'11. p.w- 01jiJI p,w· 
Equating these two results shows that Om = 0 if c'll =I= 0. 
636 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
2. The remaining ~- 5} constituents are not present: 
c~.l!+l = c~.I!+S = · ··c~.l\= 0. 
Sect. 255. 
(254.9) 
The form of the caloric equation (254.3) is thus derived; it depends not only 
on the form of the caloric equatioris (254.1) for the individual constituents but 
also on the particular variety defined by the conditions (254.8) and (254.9). 
255. Heterogeneaus media II. Explicit form of the Gibbs equation. Although 
it is only a matter of functional elimination to determine the caloric equation 
of state according to the results just preceding, we cannot expect to find its 
explicit form in general. However, in the practice of thermodynamics for continuous media Eq. (254-3) is never used other than through its material derivative following the mean motion: 
.1\ ~ 
Er= 0~ -nv + L ,u~c~ + 1: O"aWa· (255.1) ~=1 a=l 
Of course, this equation, often called the Gibbs equation, is a special case of the 
differential relation (247.2); the differentials are taken along the mean motion 
of the mixture, and the parameters Va are rendered partly explicit as v, c1, .. . , c.l\, 
where the c~ satisfy (158.5). The thermodynamic pressure n, the chemical potentials1 
.U'11, and the remaining tensions O"a are defined by 
n-- (~~)~,c,w' ,U~t=(~;r) ~ +f(rJ,V,c,w), O"a=(:er) a· (255.2) ut 11, v, c , w Wa 11, v, c, w 
The arbitrary function f in the definition of ,u~ reflects the indeterminacy 
corresponding to the infinitely many possible functional forms for dependence of 
8r upon the variables c~, which are related by the condition (158.5). A possible 
method of resolving this indeterminacy is to regard the ~-th constituent as the 
"solvent", so that 8r depends onlyupon c1 ,c2 , ••• , c.I\-J, not uponc51 ; the functionf 
in (255.2h must then be taken as 0, yieldinguniquevalues for ,u1 ,,u2 , ····1-'!il.-I• 
but .U!i\ is not defined. 
Alternatively, (255.1) may be written in the form 
Er= 0~- (n- L !i\ e'1l,u~) v+ L !i\ v,u~~ + L r O"aWa' ) 
~=1 ~=1 a=l 
!i\ !i\ r 
= 0~ + ~"'f1 V [,u~ +V (n-!B~l e!B.U!B)] e-n: + a'{;l O"aWa; 
(255.3) 
that is, the chemical potentials are related to the tensions corresponding to the 
individual densities by the following equation: 
.1\ ( :;~)~,p'l,w =V [,u'H +V (n-!8~/!B.U!B)]. (255.4) 
The quantity on the left-hand side is a uniquely defined thermodynamic coefficient; the identity is valid for all possible choices of ,U<H. Properties of these equations may be derived from the developments given in Sects. 246 to 252. However, there is no need to follow the general custom 2 of assuming the validity of 
1 This kind of chemical potential, J.l~. is used in works on irreversible thermodynamics; 
it differs from the chemical potential J.l~ of GrBBS, defined in Sects. 247 and 260, which is 
used by chemists in studies of homogeneaus mixtures in equilibrium; cf. (260.12). 2 E.g. EcKART [1940, 8], MEIXNER [1943. 2, § 2], PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. IX, § 1], 
DE GROOT [1952, 3, §§ 3, 43] and virtually all other works on "irreversible thermodynamics". 
Sect. 255. Heterogeneaus media II. 
the basic relation (255.1); rather, as suggested by the results in the last section, 
that equation should be derived, under the assumption that all constituents have 
the same temperature. 
Indeed, the explicit form of the coefficients occurring in the Gibbs equation 
(255.1) may be calculated1 in terms of the corresponding coefficients for the 
Eqs. (254.1). We set 
OE<Jl T~(!ß =~-, uv!B 
and from (254.1) obtain 
.ll f 
de'Jl = (J'Jl drJ~I + ~ TIJl!ß dv!B + ~ UIJ!.a.dwa., 
!8=1 0.=1 
for arbitrary values of the differentials. Hence in particular 
.ll f 
B<Jl,k = ()'1l'YJIJ!.,k + ~ T~(!B V!ß,k + 1: U~lo. Wa.,k• 
!8=1 o.=1 
.ll f 
EIJ!. = (J'Jl ~'11 + .~>'11 !8 V!ß + ~ U<Jla. Wo., 
!8=1 0.=1 
.ll f 
= O<H~'ll+ ~ T<H 18 (v!B + v!B,ku;1) + ~ a~ a.(wa. +wa.,kt4), 
!8=1 0.=1 
where we have used (158.10). We assume 
Putting 
0~1 = O!B = () for ~ = 1, 2, ... , .~. 
.ll 
T!ß = ~ C<H T~(!B• ~1=1 
.ll 
aa.= ~c~ a~ a., 'Jl=l 
(255.5) 
(255.6) 
(25 5.7) 
(25 5.8) 
(25 5 .9) 
where 1J!<H=e<H-01J<H, the free energy of the constituent ~. From (255.7) 1 we 
see that the last term in brackets in (255.10) is zero. From (159.2) 2 and (255.10) 
we thus obtain 
.ll f .ll 
=0~+ ~>!Bv!B+ ~aa.wa.+ ~1J'<Hc~ • (255.11) 
!8=1 0.=1 ~1=1 
Since v!B=vf~!B=vfclB-c!Bf(c'fae), from (255.11) we conclude a result having 
precisely the form of the Gibbs equation (255.1), with aa. given by (255.9), pro1 The theorem given at the end of this section extends to general mixtures a result long 
used, without derivation, for mixtures of perfect gases; cf., e.g., DuHEM [1893, Z, Part I, 
Chap. I, Eq. (15)], ECKART [1940, 8, Eq. (39)]. Foraspecial case, the derivationwas given 
by LEAF [1946, 7, pp. 750-751], but his argument seems obscured by other equations 
and unnecessary side issues. We follow TRUESDELL [1957. 16, § 11]. 
638 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 256. 
vided we set 
(255.12) 
Thus the thermodynamic pressure :r& and the chemical Potentials I-ln are evaluated 
in terms of the caloric equations of state of the constituents. The generality of 
(254.1), however, may be excessive; if we are content with the special case when 
Bn = Bn(1]n, !?n• W), (255.13) 
then the evaluations (255.12) simplify: 
:r& = ~ :r&n Where :r&n = - 8
8 En , ) n=J Vn 
I-ln = 1J'n + vn :r&n = C&, 
(255.14) 
where we may call c& the reduced free enthalpy 1 of the constituent 21:. Wehave 
thus established the following theorem: In a mixture whose several constituents 
have the same temperature at each place and time and obey caloric equations of 
state of the form (255.13), for the mean motion there is a Gibbs equation in which 
1. The total Pressure is the sum of the partial pressures, and 
2. The chemical potential of the constituent 21: in the mixture equals the individual 
reduced free enthalpy of the constituent 21:. 
In (255.12) 3 and (255.14) 3 , the potentials p,w_ must be understood as sharing 
the indeterminacy already expressed in (255.2)3 • 
In the later work we prefer to replace the Gibbs equation (255.1) by the form 
~ r 
e 81 = e ()~- e :rcv + L [en!-ln,k t4t- (en!-l9I t4),k + e 1-l<xcw.] + e L aawa, (25 5.15) 'X=l a=l 
which follows by (159.2) 2 • 
b) The production of entropy 
256. Differential equation for the specific entropy in a simple medium. Thus 
far, the considerations of this subchapter have been independent from those of 
the preceding. W e now combine the two. First confining attention to simple 
media, we write the equation of energy bala:nce (241.4) in the form 
ee =PE+ QE. (256.1) 
where PE and QE are the external power and external non-mechanical supply of 
energy: 
PE=tCPqldp 9 -mPq•wpq," QE=hP,p+eq. (256.2) 
In the non-polar case, PE reduces to the stress power, P. Analogously, we write 
(247.5) in the form 
(256.3) 
f 1 The free enthalpy Cn is obtained by subtracting from C3J the quantity ~ Wa 11na• in 
accord with (251.1)4 • a=I 
Sect. 256. Differential equation for the specific entropy in a simple medium. 639 
where t 
~=()L'l"aVa, Qr-eOiJ, (256.4) 
a=l 
the subscript I standing for inner. The work done by the thermodynamic 
tensions is said to be recoverable; thus Pr is the rate of recoverable working, per 
unit volume. Elimination of i between (256.1) and (256.3) yields 
PE-Pr+QE-Qr=O, (256.5) 
an equation stating that the difference of external and inner working cancels 
the difference of external and inner supplies of non-mechanical energy. 
By (256.4) 2 , (256.5) may be regarded as an equation for production of specific 
entropy: e ()~ = PE - Pr+ QE 0 (256.6) 
Thus only the surplus of external work over inner work affects the entropy, 
while the same non-mechanical factors contribute to the entropy as to the energy. 
In all cases, entropy rate= (energy rate)j(temperature). 
By (256.3) and (251.3) we may introduce PE or QE or both into the differential 
equations governing the thermodynamic potentials: 
e~ = ~ - e'YJ Ö =PE+ QE- Qr - e'YJ Ö, 
f 
e i = PE - Pr - e L Va ia + QE' 
a=l 
• f • 
e c = PE - Pr - e L Va ia + QE - Qr - e 'YJ (). 
a=l 
(256.7) 
These equations add further motivation for the names "free energy" and 
"enthalpy". If the non-mechanical terms in (256.7h balance one another, QE = 
Qr+e'YJÖ, then all external work is converted to free energy. If the mechanical 
f 
terms in (256.7h balance one another, PE= Pr+ e L Va ia, then all external nona=l 
mechanical supply of energy is converted into enthalpy. 
Returning to (256.6), we proceed to express the surplus of work in the form 
f 
PE- Pr= e LYaVa· (256.8) 
a=l 
To do so, we note that by (90.1) and (72.9) we have 
PE= gp,tlrq) X~q- mpqr iP,qr• ) 
-g t<•qlx"PX"' mq'(x"PX"') - pr ;ac ;q- p ;tx ;q ;r, . . _ (rq) cx qr cx -P qr cx ß -P- -(gp,t X;q-mp X;qr)X;cx-mp X;qX;,X;cxß· 
(256.9) 
W e now agree to choose the first 9 parameters Va as the xf"' , the next 18 as the 
18 independent xf .. p. in some fixed order. This is not a loss in generality, since 
in materials such that e does not depend on some or all of these variables, we 
may take the corresponding 't"a as zero. With this choice of parameters Va, we 
obtain (256.8) by putting 
1 ( tlrq)X"' -m q•X"')- ( lleJ e gp, ;q P ;qr Bx~..J,/ Q =1, 2, ... , 9, 
Ya= --1 mp qr X;qX;,- cx ß ( --lle ) p , (! OX;cxß TJ 
Q = 10, 11,. 0 0' 27, (256.10) 
-(::J'f} Q = 28, 29,. 0 0' f. 
640 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 256. 
The first 27 Ya represent the excesses of the total symmetric stress and total 
couple stress over the parts of the stress and couple stress which do recoverable 
work. Equivalently, we may write1 
(256.11) 
where the second result has been used to simplify the first, and conclude that 
! 
PE-Pr=nt<Pq)dpq-nmPq•wpq,r-e L <aVa, 
a=S8 
(256.12) 
so that only the dissipative parts nt and nm oft and m contribute to the entropy 2• 
The definition of nt implied by (256.11) coincides with that given in Sect. 218 
only in certain special cases, neither being strictly more general than the other. 
To render explicit the definitions used here, we rewrite (256.10) by setting 
{
YP for a = 1, 2, ... , 9 } 
Ya= fJ yp for a = 10, 11, ... , 27 (256.13) 
so as to indicate the tensorial character of the parameters Ya· Then from (256.1~ 
and (256.11h we have 
nmpqr =-(!YpfJ .x'fcx x7p; (256.14) 
by (256.10)1 and (256.11) 1 follows 
(256.15) 
In particular, these results hold when the stresses doing recoverable work 
are hydrostatic, since this is the special case when (256.11)t reduces to 3 
t~ =- :nb~ + nt~. :n =-(oejov)T/ (256.16) 
[cf. (218.11) and the developments following from it]. 
1 In principle, this result is due to HELLINGER [1914, 4, § 7b], generalizing an analysis 
of E. and F. COSSERAT [1909, 5, §§53-55]. 2 Since it is possible that the entire stress be dissipative, a better statement is: A ny portion of the stressthat does recoverable work makes no contribution to the entropy. Also, as shown 
in Sect. 256A, there may be constraints such as to prevent certain dissipative stresses from 
contributing to the entropy. 3 Here we take occasion to warn the reader against a celebrated pitfall that continues 
to trip writers on hydrodynamics: In (256.16), n is not just any hydrostatic pressure but 
exactly the thermodynamic pressure, related to the caloric equation of state by n =-(otjov)T/. 
If t= -pl, then t= -nl-(p-n)l, so that in (256.5) 
nt = - (p - n) 1. (A) 
In words: When the stress is hydrostatic, the excess of the total pressure over the thermodynamic 
pressure is dissipative. More generally, for a substance with caloric equation of state E = 
E(1J, v, X), we have 
t =- nl + nt. (B) 
If we choose to write the total stress in the form (204.6), then the extra stress v is not necessarily the dissipative stress. In fact 
nt = - (p - n) 1 + v. (C) 
Choosing p as the mean pressure p and v as the stress deviator 0t does not alter or simplify 
this result. In an isochoric motion, an arbitrary hydrostatic pressure does no work (cf. 
Sect. 256A. Appendix. The fully recoverable case. 641 
From (256.11 )1 , only the symmetric part of the stress doing recoverable work 
is determined. This is consistent with (205.10), which yields the skew symmetric 
part of t when m is known and l is assigned 1• 
256A. Appendix. The fully recoverable case. So as to point up the special and restricted 
character of many discussions of the subject, we insert here a characterization of the case 
when all work is recoverable. By definition, 
From (256.5) follows the necessary and sufficient condition2 
QE = Qr = (! 0 i1. 
(256A.1) 
(256A.2) 
For (256A.2) to hold it is sufficient, but not necessary, that the process be isentropic and 
QE= o. From (256.7) we have the alternative necessary and sufficient conditions 
f 
(!X=-(! 1: Vafa+QE· Q=l (256A.3) 
The fully recoverable case is characterized by the splitting3 of the equation of energy 
into the two Eqs. (256A.1) and (256A.2). Eq. (256A.1), or an equivalent form, may be 
used to relate the stress to the thermodynamic tensions; Eq. (256A.2) remains for the control of 
such thermal phenomena as may be occurring. 
If there are no constraints, either kinematical or thermodynamic, then from (256.8) we 
conclude that Ya= o; this implies that we may put nt = 0 and nrn= 0 in (256.11) and obtain 
explicit formulae for t(Pq) and mpq' in terms of the derivatives of e at constant entropy. 
Such formulae are called stress-strain relations. When e does not depend upon the xf<X/1• we may write the result in the more familiar form' · 
(256A.4) 
where T,." is PIOLA's. double vector defined by (210.4)1 . 
If there are constraints, (256A.1) no ionger necessarily implies nt = 0 and nrn = o. 
When the constraints are kinematical, the appropriate modifications are easily read off 
from results in Sect. 233. For general thermodynamic constraints, the proper stress-strain 
relations are not known. However, if the constraint is 0 = const, from (256A.3h we obtain 
(256A.S) 
Sect. 217); hence in an incompressible fluid, for which n = 0, the hydrostatic pressure may 
be taken as any convenient scalar without affecting the balance of energy. 
Among the few hydrodynamic writers who treat the distinction between n and p correctly 
may be cited DUHEM [1901, 7, Part I, Chap. I, § 8], ZAREMBA [1903, 18, pp. 385, 390, 402], 
HILBERT [1907, 3, pp. 220-222], and LAMB [1932, 8, § 325, footnote, § 358]. 
The idea illustrated here is: The concept of recoverable work is subservient to the existence 
of a caloric equation of state, and only the tensions derived from such an equation do work 
which makes no contribution to the entropy. 
1 This explains why thermodynamic treatments of elasticity never prove the symmetry 
of the stress tensor, since even when rn = 0 the condition e[kq] = o follows only if l = 0, and 
the assigned couple field l does not enter the formalism of thermodynamics. This illustrates 
the remark in Sect. 262 that a satisfactory energetics fully independent of mechanical considerations has never been attained. 
2 The form we give to the argument extends a suggestion by TouPIN and ERICKSEN 
[1952, 21, § 33]. The argument itself, usually couched in verbal evasions designed to !end 
it a specious generality, is old and common. Cf. VorGT [1889, 9, pp. 943-949] [1895, 8, 
Pt. III, Chap. I, §§ 6-9] [1910, 10, §§ 277, 381-382, 389, 392, 394], MüLLER and TIMPE 
[1906, 6, §Sc], LovE [1927, 6, § 62], L. BRILLOUIN [1938, 2, Chap. X, §VIII], SrGNORINI 
[1949, 27, Chap. I, '1['1[1-2]. Cf. the discussion by ZoLLER [1959.12]. 
3 For the hydrodynamical special case, the distinction was emphasized by V. BJERKNES 
et al. [1933, 3, Vorwort and § 24]. 
4 KIRCHHOFF [1852, 1, p. 772]. A !ist of equivalent forms is given by TRUESDELL [1952, 
21, §§ 39-40]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/t. 41 
642 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 57. 
From (256.9). provided there are no kinematical constraints, we thus obtain for the isothermal 
case stress-strain relations of the same form as those described in the preceding paragraph 
for the isentropic case, except that 1p replaces e, and the derivatives are taken with () held 
constant. In this case there are in general non-zero dissipative stresses 0 t and 0m, but 
they do no work in motions compatible with the constraint () = const. 
The foregoing results characterize the classical theory of finite elastic strain, as weil as 
the theory of perfect compressible fluids, included as the special case when e depends on 
the nine xfcx only through J [cf. (218.11) to (218.13)]. In the non-polar case, when t is symmetric and m = 0, comparison with (218.6) enables us to assert that i/alt work is recoverable, 
there exists a strain energy a if either of the foltowing additional conditions hold: 
1. There are no constraints, either kinematical or thermodynamic; or 
2. There are no kinematical constraints, and the motion is isothermal. 
T he strain energies for these two cases are: 
1. a = eoe, 
2. a = eo'P· 
In both these cases, the work theorem (218.10) holds when the stress vector on the boundary 
is normal to the velocity there. 
It is noteworthy that the basic assumption for both cases is that in any possible deformation of the material, alt work is recoverable 1• Also noteworthy is the characterizing quality 
of the results, which show, for example, that if e does not depend on the x~"' or the x7"' f3, 
and if there are no constraints, then only in the trivial case when t = o and m = o can the 
material experience a deformation in which all the work done is recoverable. 
257. Production of total entropy 2• The total entropy H of the body "Y is 
given by the definition 3 
H- f 'YJ diJJL (257.1) 
.y 
The occurrence of () on the left-hand side of (256.6) makes the equation for 
production of total entropy assume a form strikingly different from that for 
the production of specific entropy. Since (256.6) may be written in the form 
e~ = ll>; Pr + ( h;) + hPo~.P_ + eoq_, (257.2) 
,p 
by (257.1) and (156.8) 1 we have 
H-~ hP~ap = f(L1 + endv, (257-3) 
:7' .y 
1 The criticism of TRUESDELL [1952, 21, § 33] is directed toward this assumption, which 
is usually not stated in discussions of Case 2. 
In evaluating the theory, it is essential to recall that its object is to relate the total stress t 
to the thermodynamic tensions Ta. Werewe content, as are most writers on thermodynamics, 
to accept the Ta as the actual tensions in the material, there would be no problem, since the 
Ta may always be calculated from (247.8) 2 or from {251.4),. 2 Our presentation in this section and the next follows EcKART [1940, 7]. Cf. also MEIXNER [1941, 2, §§ 2-3] [1943, 3, §§ 3-4]. Earlier authors were inclined to select one or 
another quantity bearing the dimension of [entropy]/[time] and on the basis of some physical 
argument call it the "irreversible" production of entropy; this arbitrary procedure has been 
criticized by DE GROOT [1952, 3, §§ 1, 82]. However, the criticism is not applicable to the work 
of TaLMAN and FINE [ 1948, 31], who in essence follow EcKART's procedure and on the basis 
of (257.3) call LI the "irreversible" rate of production of entropy, thereafter deriving other 
equations in which LI occurs, e.g. 
e () iJ = hf>. P - kP (log O). P + () LI + e q . 
Some alternative forms involving the coefficients {248.5) are discussed by HuNT [1955, 14, 
§ 1C, d]. 
3 There is always a question as to how the total entropy of a system should be defined 
The definition {257.1), asserting that what we call the total entropy of a body is the sum 
of the entropies of the several elements of mass, is unequivocal and isthat customarily introduced in continuum mechanics. We do not attempt to decide whether this definition is 
consistent with others, such as those used in statistical mechanics. 
Sect. 258. The entropy inequality. 643 
where 
(25 7.4) 
Ya being given by (256.10). Eq. (257.3) for production oj total entropy is an 
equation of balance of the type (157.1). 
Unlike our earlier examples of equations of balance, (257.3) is not set down 
by definition 1. Rather, it is derived from the assumptions expressed by previous 
equations, and the quantities occurring in it have meanings in earlier associations. 
From (257.3) we see that total entropy may be regarded as flowing into a body 
through its boundary at the rate -hj(), where - h is the influx of non-mechanical 
energy. The supply of entropy is ilfe +qjß; in particular, by (257.4), a nonzero flow of non-mechanical energy creates entropy only when it is in the presence 
of a temperature gradient. Both the supply of non-mechanical energy and the 
excess of total working over recoverable working contribute to the total entropy 
in just the same: way as to the specific entropy. In summary, total entropy is 
changed by the same factors that change:energy, with two modifications: 
1. Entropy rate= ( energy rate)/ ( temperature), and 
2. In addition to the sources fust stated, there is also an effective supply of energy 
of amount hP (log ()), P. 
The supply of entropy iJ is given by the bilinear form (257.4). The terms 
occurring in this form are the building blocks of recent theories of particular 
thermodynamic phenomena 2• It has grown customary to name the two terms 
in each summand a thermodynamic force or affinity and a corresponding thermodynamic flux. For example, we may set up the table: 
Affinity 
(1/ß), k 
Corresponding flux 
-hk 
(! Yaf() 
There seems tobe no compelling reason for assigning any one term to one category 
or to the other, and usage varies 3• In any case, the terms entering iJ are not 
uniquely determined, since, as was remarked in Sect. 157, in an equation of 
balance it is trivially possible to shift any term from the surface integral into the 
volume integral at will, and conversely, though not always explicitly, to shift 
any term from volume integral into the surface integral. Thus we are unable 
to see any physical significance in the interpretation of any one term in (257.3) 
unless accompanied by interpretation of all the other terms. 
258. The entropy inequality4. It is a matter of experience that a substance 
at uniform temperature and free from sources of heat may consume mechanical 
work but cannot give it out. That is, whatever work is not recoverable is lost, 
1 A formally analogaus treatment can be applied to the calculation of the rate of change 
of J va di!R but has no interest. Indeed, as is plain from the manner in which entropy was 
"'I" 
introduced in Sect. 246, its properties differ from those of the parameters va only in physical 
dimension. 
2 Cf. footnote 1, p. 618. 
a Cf. the references cited in Sect. 259. 4 The postulate (258.3), which sometimes shares with (247 .2) the name second law of 
thermodynamics, for the case when h = 0 and q = 0 is due to CLAusrus [1854, 1, p. 152] [1862, 
1, § 1] [1865, 1, §§ 1, 14-17]; the surface integral was added by DuHEM [1901, 7, Part. I, 
Chap. 1, § 6]. 
41* 
644 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Fie!d Theories. Sect. 258. 
not created. Similarly, in a body at rest and subject to no sources of heat, the 
flow of heat is from the hotter to the colder parts, not vice versa. The two observations, abstracted and generalized, may be put as follows: 
1. PE- P1 ~ 0 when q =0 and () =const, } 
2. hPO,p ~ 0 when q =0 and PE -P1 = 0. (258.1) 
In both these cases, by (257.4) we conclude that 
()LI~ o. (258.2) 
When 0>0, by (257.3) we see that (258.2) 1s equivalent to 
H-f hP~a/>. ~ J e,l dv. (258-3) 
[/' '"f'" 
Guided by these special cases, we might set up (258.3), or the equivalent 
condition (258.2), as a general postulate oj irreversibility1. Unlike the previous 
assumptions of the field theories, it is an inequality rather than an equation. 
I t asserts a trend in time for various processes. 
The most familiar of these is an adiabatic process, defined by the condition 
that non-mechanical energy flow neither in nor out through the boundary, nor 
be created or destroyed within the body: h = 0 on !/, q = 0 in "Y. Then (258.3) 
yields H ~ 0: In an adiabatic process, the total entropy cannot decrease 2• 
If (258.3) is to hold for all bodies, it is equivalent to the local condition (258.2) 
restricting the sum of products of affinities by fluxes (cf. Sect. 257). Whether or 
not this condition may be broken down into a statement that separate parts, 
such as hPO,p, are to be severally non-negative depends on whether or not the 
body is susceptible of independent variation of the parameters Va and () or of 
sets of these parameters, and whether or not the partial sums selected are scalars 
under appropriate transformations 3• 
1 We are aware of the unsatisfactory nature of (258.3) in that h and q are not uniquely 
defined. However, since q is to include the possibility of arbitrarily assignable sources and 
sinks of heat, we cannot restriet its sign or its value. 
2 Notice that the specific entropy 1] is not necessarily non-decreasing at all places and 
times in an adiabatic process. Cf. MEISSNER [ 1938, 7, § 11]. 
3 Here we touch on a great mystery of the subject. Writers on irreversible thermodynamics appear to select partial sums at will and then demand that each one be non-negative. 
Certainly, however, an arbitrary choice is not justified: E.g., it is not necessary that h1 0, 1 ~ o, 
and it would make no sense to require it, since h1 0, 1 is not scalarunder co-ordinate transformations. In dealing with the more complicated situation to be considered in the next 
section, PRIGOGINE and MAZUR [1951, 21,_ §3d] demand that certain terms in L1 be separately 
non-negative, "tout coupJage entre quantites de caractere tensoriel different etant interdit ... " 
but the meaning of this assertion is not clear to us. Cf. also KrRKWOOD and CRAWFORD 
[1952, 12, p. 1050]: "We must treat scalars, vectors and tensors separately, for entities of 
different tensorial character cannot interact (CuRrE's theorem)." In the publication of 
CuRIE [1894, 1] sometimes cited in this connection we are unable to find anything relevant. 
Interactions between quantities of different tensorial orders are well known in the kinetic 
theory of gases and are illustrated in Sect. 307. Possibly what the writers on "irreversible 
thermodynamics" mean to describe is the separation of effects that follows by linearization 
of isotropic functions (cf. Sects. 2931] and 307). Also we stumble again over the most 
serious gap in the fundamentals of thermodynamics, that the appropriate group of transformations of the thermodynamic variables and the invariance to be required arenot known. 
Cf. footnote 2, p. 620. 
Sect. 259. Production of entropy in a heterogeneaus medium. 645 
If we raise (258.3) to the level of a general postulate of mechanics, then it 
is to be applied also to regions containing surfaces of discontinuity. At such 
a surface, provided a (erJ)f8t and eqf() be bounded, it is equivalent to 1 
(258.4) 
259. Production of entropy in a heterogeneaus medium 2• Confining attention 
to the non-polar case, we eliminate i 1 between (243.9) and (255.15), obtaining 
ft ft 
e()'lj=h~,k+ L (e'l!.U'llu;),k- L (!'l!.U'll,ku;+D, (259.1) 'll~l ~[~1 
where 
ft 
h~ = h1 - L (!'ll e'll ut 'll~l 
f ft 
D == t1m dk m + n d~ - (! L O"b Wb + L t;m U'llk, m - (259.2) 
b~I 'll~l 
ft 
- (! L [P~ u'll k + c'l! (,U'l! + t Ufu)] + (! qr · 'll~I 
Therefore 
• ( sk) A f! qi erJ- 7r ,k =LJ+e· (259-3) 
1 In the case when h = O, this farnaus condition was introduced into gas dynamics by 
}OUGUET [1901, 9] [1904, 3, § 2] and ZEMPLEN [1905, 8] (cf. also HADAMARD [1905, 1], 
RAyLEIGH [1910, 8, pp. 590- 591]), where it is used to prove that shocks of rarefaction are 
impossible, since it may be shown to follow from the conditions of stability (Sect. 265) and from 
205.7) that sgn [17] = sgn [e]. For proof, see Sects. 55 to 56 of the article by SERRIN, Mathematical Principles of Classical Fluid Mechanics, this Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII/1. 
2 This subject has been discussed by numerous authors, e.g. EcKART [1940, 8], MEIXNER 
[1943, 2, § 2] [1943, 3, § 4], PRIGOGINE and MAZUR [1951, 21, § 3] [1951, 17, § 2]. Our treatment follows TRUESDELL [1957, 16, § 12]. 
As mentioned in Sect. 243, detailed comparison of our results with those of thermodynamic writers is not possible, since they employ an equation for balance of energy obtained 
by intuition rather than derivation. An exception is furnished by the treatment of HIRSCHFELDER, CuRTISS and BIRD [1954, 9, §§ 7.6a, 7.6b, and 11.1]; if we presume that their 
phenomenological variables are to be understood as including as special cases the corresponding quantities they define explicitly for the kinetic theory of gas mixtures, then our treatment and theirs are in entire agreement up to the point where they introduce a caloric equation of state for the mixture. Instead of our (255.1) they write an equation of similar form 
containing i rather than i 1 on the left-hand side. It seems to us that such an equation cannot 
be exact: the total kinetic energy of diffusion cannot be a function of static parameters alone, 
since any diffusion velocities, at a given place and instant, are compatible with any values 
of the local thermodynamic state. From our point of view, HrRSCHFELDER, CuRTISS and 
BIRD neglect the quadratic term in (243.1) when they calculate (255.1), although they do 
not neglect it when deriving (243.7). This observation accounts entirely for the difference 
between their equation for production of total entropy and our Eq. (259.4). 
Perhaps motivated by results in the approximate kinetic theory of diffusion, numerous 
writers on irreversible thermodynamics (e.g. PRIGOGINE [1949, 24, § 1]) recommend use 
of a "reduced" heat flux which in our notation is given by 
From (243.2) and (243.8) 2 we see that this reduced heat flux is precisely our - hr if we assume 
(as in theories of diffusion) that t21 = - :7l2( 1 and if we neglect the kinetic energy of diffusion. 
646 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
where 
5t 
sk = h~ + L: e~ ,u~ u~' ~=1 
5t 
= M + L: e~ (.u~r- e~) ~, ~=1 
5t 
(.)Lf == h~ (log ll),k- ll L; e~ (,u~/ll),k ~+D- eqr, ~=1 
5t f 
= ( h~- L; e~e~u~) (logll),k + t1m dkm + nd~- e L; a0 w0 + ~=1 0=1 
5t 
+ L: [t~mu~k.m-e~e (,u~;e),k~-eP~ u~k- ec~(.u~ + t ut)J. ~=1 
Sect. 259. 
(259.4) 
The form of L1 suggests the following possible division of the variables into affinities and fluxes: 
Affinity Corresponding flux 
5t 
( 1/ ll) k - [ h1- L: e~ e~ u~] ~=1 
dkm ~ [t~m+ngkmJ 
wo - e aofll 
U~k,m t~m;e 
u~ - [e~ (,u~/ll),k + e P~kfliJ 
ec~ 1 [ 1 2] -0 ,u~+2u~ 
To the doubts mentioned at the end of Sect. 257 must be added the remark that 
various alternative forms and regroupings of terms in (259.4) itself are obviously 
possible and lead to different selection of affinities and fluxes 1• To mention the 
simplest of examples, if as in Sect. 257 we choose some of the parameters Wa 
as the x7"', the second and third lines in the above table coalesce into the single 
line 
as has already appeared in our treatment of a simple medium. Also, part of the 
flux on the first line, since it is proportional to u~, could equally well be combined 
with that on the next-to-last line. 
For heterogeneaus media the entropy inequality is assumed to hold in the 
form (258.3), or, equivalently, (258.2). It is customary, though there appears 
to be no solid reason for it, to infer that various sums occurring in L1 are separately 
1 We share the view of EcKART [1940, 8] that the classification is arbitrary. However, 
most thermodynamic writers disagree with this view and with each other's choices. The point 
has been discussed from a physical Standpoint by MEIXNER [ 1942, 9, Zusatz bei der Korrektur] and by DE GROOT [1952, 3, §§ 2, 9-13, 18]. MEIXNER [1943. 2, § 3] has also investigated 
the invariance of the classification under linear transformation, but only in the case when the 
affinities and fluxes are assumed linearly related. Cf. also PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. IX, § 2], 
DE GROOT [1952, 3, §§ 29, 44, 52, 78]. MEIXNER and REIK in § 5 of their article, "Thermodynamik der irreversiblen Prozesse", this Encyclopedia, Vol. 111/2, notice the infinitely 
many possible ways of rearranging and regrouping terms in (259.3); they suggest that it 
should be done in such a way as to render the source of entropy non-negative in all circumstances, and they assert that the only possibility of satisfying this requirement is given by 
the particular form they adopt. 
Sect. 260. Differential condition for homogeneity. 647 
.S\ 
non-negative. For example, EcKART1 concluded that ~c~,u~~O; by (159A.5), ~=1 
we have equivalently 
.S\ 
t:... "" c~,u~ ~ * ~ 0. (259.5) ~=\1!+1 
In particular, if only one compound ~ is being created, it is forming or dissociating 
according as its potential difference ,u~ is negative or positive. Thus when but 
a single compound substance can result, the reaction proceeds so as to reduce 
its potential difference to zero. EcKART concluded also that from his special 
cases of (259.3) and (258.3) that 
c~~,U~l,kut ~ o; (259.6) 
that is, the diffusion current for the substance ~ carries it toward a region of 
lower chemical potential. Interesting as are such inequalities, it is not justified at present to regard them as derived from any general principle. 
111. Equilibrium. 
There are several different ideas of the meaning of "equilibrium"; when put 
into mathematical form, they lead to conditions that are not generally equivalent 
to one another. These conditions occur frequently in the Iiterature of irreversible 
thermodynamics, but their interrelations have been studied only subject to the 
assumption of linear constitutive equations. We confine the following sections 
to the general definitions. 
260. Differential condition for homogeneity. Thus far wehavenot needed to 
restriet the variables va specifying the sub-state. Now, however, we presume 
that they are the densities of additive set functions. The set functions themselves 
are called extensive variables 2• When the thermodynamic state is homogeneous, 
which here is taken to mean uniform, throughout a body, we have then 
'YJ = HJIDl, e = ~JIDl, Va = TaJIDl, where Ta- f VadiDl, 
..".. 
and (246.1) may be written in the equivalent form 
~ = m e(~ .~) = ~(H, T, IDl), (26o.1) 
.S\ 1 [ 1940, 8, esp. p. 924]. The quantity A = (! ~ c~ ,uw was called the "affinity" or "chemical ~=1 
affinity" by DE DoNDER and has been studied intensively in connection with chemical reactions; cf. DE DONDER [1927, 3] [1929, 1] [1932, 5], DUPONT [1932, 6]. If we use (159A.6), 
we may write the chemical affinity A in the form 
( .S\ 
A = ~ JaAa. Aa = ~ N~a.U~· a=1 ~=1 
where { is the total number of chemical reactions that may occur. The quantity Aa is the 
chemical affinity of the reaction a. Further developments follow by assuming that A a is 
an assignable function of the thermodynamic state, etc. The Iiterature of this subject is 
obfuscated by the habit of writing all rates as time derivatives of otherwise undefined quantities. 2 The distinction between extensive and intensive variables is due to MAXWELL [ 1876, 4]; 
the former kind, which he called magnitudes, "represents a physical quantity, the value of 
which, for a material system, is the sum of its values for the parts of the system ", while the 
latter "denote the intensity of certain physical properties of the substance". The defining 
property of intensive variables is expressed by (260.2) and hence is an alternative statement 
of the homogeneity of (260.1) when the densities of the extensive variables are uniform. In 
general, then, "intensive variable" is no more than another name for "field ". 
648 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 260. 
where the function on the right-hand side is homogeneous of degree 1 in all 
its arguments. Since by (247.1) we have 
0~ - o(me) - oe - () 0~ oe 
BH- o(m1J) - BrJ- ' oYa = ova =Ta, (260.2) 
the temperature and thermodynamic tensions are independent of the amount 
of material present. Such variables are called intensive. The Euler differential 
equation expressing the homogeneity of (260.1) is1 
G: = 0 H + 1fiaTa Ta +,u Wl, l 8 = O'Yj + L Ta Va + ,u, a=1 
where 0~ 
,u == om · 
By (251.1) 4 we may write (260.3) in the form 
c =,u, 
(260.3) 
(260.4) 
(260. 5) 
expressing succinctly the relation between the caloric equation of state for the 
density, 8, and that for the total energy, Gl: [cf. the analogous result (255.14) 3]. 
While (260. 3) is the basic expression of homogeneity, other forms are more 
commonly encountered. First, from (260.2) and (260.3) we have 
l 
d@ = 0 d H + L Ta d Ta+ ,Ud Wl (260.6) a=l 
as the counterpart of (247.2). If we subtract this from the differential of (260.3)1 , 
we obtain the Gibbs-Duhem equation 2 : 
l 
0 = H d() + L TadTa + Wld,u. (260.7) a=1 
For an alternative derivation, we need only multiply (251.3) 4 by ill( and then 
take note of (260.5). 
In the usual applications the Va are supposed to consist in the sr masses ill(~ 
of the constituents of a mixture and in a further set S~ of extensive variables Da 
independent of the partial masses. These quantities, in the case of a homogeneous 
system, are related to the densities used in Sect. 254 and 25 5 as follows: 
9)(2! V 
I c~ d ill( = c~ ill(' ~=1 
.i wc~ = ill( ' I 
Da= I WadWl = Wa Wl. V 
(260.8) 
From (260.3) we have 
! ft 
Gl:r = 0 H + L aaDa + L;,u~Wl~ + ,u Wl, (260.9) a=1 ~=1 
where 
(260.10) 
1 GIBBS [1875. 1, Eq. (54)]. 2 GrBBS [1875, 1, Eq. {97)], DUHEM [1886, 2, Part Il, Chap. Il, Eq. (81)]. 
Sect. 260. Differential condition for homogeneity. 649 
and where we have written 1 instead of ~ as areminderthat a mixture is being 
considered (cf. Sects. 254 and 255). The indeterminacy represented by the occurrence of /(H, rol, .2) is the sameasthat already encountered in (255.2). So as 
to eliminate this indeterminacy, we may agree to regard 1 as a function of 
ml, m2, ... , mjl but not also of m; then we may set 
(260.11) 
It is these chemical potentials ,u~ which generally are used in works on chemical 
equilibrium. They have the disadvantage of not being easily interpretable in 
terms of densities. However, for any f in (260.10), by (260.4), (260.6)a, and 
(260.8) we obtain 
,u~ = ,U'll. + ,u ' 
while (260.6) and (260.7) become, respectively, 
d~, ~ 9 d H +,~,"' dQ, +.~f; d!!Jl,,l 
0 = H d () + I.J2adaa + L m'l(d,u~. a=1 'li.=I 
The latter relation may be written in terms of densities: 
f 5l 
0 =1Jd() + LWadaa + L c'll.d,u~, a=1 'll=1 
(260.12) 
(260.13) 
(260.14) 
but it is important to note that the differentials of the ,u~, not generally the ,U'll., 
occur here. However, the custom among thermodynamical writers of expressing 
all relations in differential form can lead to confusion, since the differentials dc'li. 
arenot independent. From (158.5) it follows that 
By (260.12), then, 
.lt 
Ldc'll. =0. 
'll.=1 
5l 5l 
L f.l'li. d Cl]l = L f.l~ d C'l(. 'l1.=1 '11=1 
(260.15) 
(260.16) 
Thus the Gibbs equation (260.13) 1 , for homogeneaus conditions, may be written 
in either of the forms 
ds1 = () d1J +a~ aa dwa +~r~l~ dem, I 
f 5l (260.17) 
= () d1J + L aadwa + Lf.lmdc'l(, a=1 21=1 
as well as in other forms, for variations in which the total mass is kept constant. 
It is customary to take one of the parameters !2a as the volume, 78. The 
Gibbs-Duhem relation (260.14) then assumes the form 
5l f 
o = 1J d () - v d n + L c~1 d,urr + L wa daa. (260.18) ~1=1 a~1 
While writers on "irreversible thermodynamics" sometimes use the relations 
of this section in problems concerning deformation, we are unable to find any 
650 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 261, 262. 
solid ground for ascribing any relevance to them except in equilibrium. Consequences of (260.13) are 
ft ( o.u~) 2>~ -0- ~ =O, ~=l C~ O,n,c ,a 
V~=-- ( o.u~) . o:rr: O,c,a (260.19) 
Another condition of equilibrium, apparently independent of the foregoing, is the principle of detailed balancing, asserting that in thermostatic equilibrium each chemical reaction 
is individually in equilibrium. In terms of the reaction rates Ja occurring in (159A.6), this 
postulate asserts that 1J = const and v = const implies Ja= 0 for all a. 
261. Mechanical equilibrium. By definition, a system is in mechanical equilibrium if :V= 0 in an inertial system. For simple media, no special thermodynamic 
consequences result. For heterogeneaus media, however, by (215.4) and (205.2) 
we have 
5\ 
tkm,m + L (J~I ~~ == 0. (261.1) ~~1 
If now we add assumptions 1 sufficient to validate the Gibbs-Duhem equation 
(260.18), from its two consequences (260.19) we obtain 
5\ ft [ ft o.u*) ~2;1 e~(f~,.- .U~.k) =-tk:m- (J ~2;1 c~ ];:1 ( oc: o,",c~./!!.!,k + 
+ ( :o~)", c,a e,,. + ( ~~ t. o,a n, k+ bt ( ::: t. "· c, ab ab,k]' (261.2) 
=- (t'l: + n b'/:),m- e .± c~ f( ~) e,k + ± ( :.u~) bab,k] · ~~1 l "· c,a b~1 ab 0, "· c, a 
Further drastic assumptions are required in order to get a simple result. 
If () = const and if the parameters w do not appear or if ab = const for all b, 
and if further t'l: =-nb'/:, then (261.2) yields 
5\ 
L: e~u~!k- .U~,k) = o. '2!~1 
In this case, by (158.19), we may apply (158.18) to show that 
5\ 5\ 
L (J'H {f~ k - .U~. k) ut = L !?'H (f'l! k - .U~. k) ut '!1~1 'H~l 
for all definitions of the diffusion Velocity U'H. 
(261.3) 
(261.4) 
It is also possible to reorganize the terms in (261.2) in a fashion analogaus 
to that used in Sect. 256. 
According to EcKART2, it should be possible to arrange the affinities and fluxes 
(Sect. 259) in such a way that the vanishing of the ones is a definition of equilibrium; the vanishing of the others should then be a provable criterion of equilibrium. This interesting idea does not serve to classify the quantities uniquely. 
262. Variational condition of equilibrium. Toward the end of the nineteenth 
century arose a tendency to regard all gross phenomena as essentially thermodynamical, whence followed attempts to construct a system of energetics including mechanics as a subsidiary part3. The strength and the weakness of this 
1 The idea was suggested by PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. IX, § 3]; we generalize the 
treatment of DE GROOT [1952, 3, § 47]. 2 [1940, 8, p. 270], "D-factors" and "C-factors". 3 Cf. DuHEM [1911, 4], }AUMANN [1911, 7] [1918, 3], LoHR [1917, 5] [1924, 10] [1940, 
17] [1948, 12]. 
Sect. 262. Variational condition of equilibrium. 651 
approach are illustrated in the special case when the substate v in (246.1) consists in the 9 deformation gradients x~x from a reference state X. The objective 
is to give a purely thermodynamic delinition ol stress, without reference to mechanical considerations, and to derive CAUCHY's laws (Sect. 205) as special cases 
of a general criterion of equilibrium 1• 
This condition is bipartite. First, the principle of virtual work in the form 
(232.6) when äl =0-i.e., ~ =0-along with the postulate 
~=t5fediDl, (262.1) 
-r 
is assumed. Second, thermal equilibrium is defined by 
t5 H = o. (262.2) 
All variations are assumed to respect the conservation of mass. From (262.1), 
(232.5), (247.2), and (156.1) follows 
r 
Je [0 I5'Yj + L Ta t5 Va] dV = ~ s" t5xk da + Je I" t5xk dV, 
-r a=I fl' -r (262.3) 
Je I5'Yjdv= o. 
-r 
The second condition is equivalent to the requirement that 'YJ = const in the variations; in this case, or in the alternative case that (262.3) is used as a side 
condition and the variations are executed with (J = const, the former condition 
becomes r 
Je L Ta t5va dV = ~ s" t5xk da + Je I" t5xk dV. (262.4) 
-r a=I fl' -r 
Further progress cannot be made unless we specify the relation between the 
t5va and the t5x". If all variations are independent, we get 
Ta = 0, sk = 0, jk = 0 (262.5) 
as the conditions of equilibrium for this trivial case. However, if the Va are in 
fact the ~K· as we agreed to assume, then we write (262.3) in the form 
f e ( ~;) t5x~x dV = ~ s" t5xk da + f e jk t5xk dV. (262.6) 
-r ' [/' -r 
Since t5~x = (t5x");K• by GREEN's transformation we thus obtain 
0 = J. (s" da - e ~:- dAx) t5x" + f [e jk + (e ~1----). ] t5x" dV. (262.7) 'f" ox.K OX ·K ,K [/' ' -r ' 
lf there are no kinematical constraints, it follows that 
s"da =e~dA" ox;K 
o=(-~~) +-1" (! oxk ·K (! ;K' 
on .91 
in "f'". 
(262.8) 
1 The analysis we present is due to Grass [1875. I, pp. 184-190]. The theory based on 
the more special assumptions E= e(E, X) was initiated by GREEN [1839. I, pp. 248_:_255] 
[1841, 2, pp. 298-300] and developed by KrRCHHOFF [1850, 2, § 1] [1852, I, pp. 770-772] 
and KELVIN [1855. 4] [1856, 2, Chaps. XIII, XIV] [1863, 2, §§ 61-67] [1867, 3, § 673] and 
App. C. § § (c)- (d)]. Cf. Sect. 232. Further attempts along this line have never been successful. The usual approach is to assume e depends on various variables at hand. For example, 
VAN MrEGHEM [1935, 9, § 3] sets up the equation e = e(n, 0, A, ih where A is the affinity 
and Eis defined by (31.6) 2 , as supposedly appropriate for a viscous fluid. 
652 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
By (210.5) and (210.8), the quantities defined by 
F,K--~ k -(!~k uX;K 
Sect. 263. 
(262.9) 
in virtue of (262.1) and (262.2) satisfy the same equations as those imposed on 
PIOLA's double vector T,.K in virtue of the conditions of equilibrium in continuum 
mechanics. Thus it is not inconsistent with mechanical principles if we set 
(262.10) 
and replace the laws of statics by the conditions (262.1) and (262.2) of thermodynamic 
equilibrium. At bottom, this analysis rests on the same idea asthat in Sect. 256A. 
If there are additional parameters Va beyond the x7K, the corresponding Ta 
must vanish in equilibrium, provided there are no constraints. The details here 
are akin to those in Sect. 256. 
Despite the elegance of the foregoing analysis, it cannot be accepted. Indeed, 
from a special thermodynamic assumption, CAUCHY's first law has been derived. 
That CAUCHY's second law cannot be derived by such methods is plain from its 
generalform (205.10) and from footnote 2, p. 596. In fact, in general the stresst 
derived from (262.1 0) is not symmetric unless some additional assumption, such 
as that e depends on the x7K only through E, is added. 
But there is a deeper objection. The equations of mechanics describe a wider 
range of phenomena than do the principles of thermodynamics. No one will 
contest the principles of balance of mass, momentum, and energy, but the existence of a caloric equation of state is an assumption of a more special kind1. 
CAUCHY's laws arevalid for all sorts of continuous media, but in essence the thermodynamic method just explained is restricted to perfectly elastic bodies 2• If there 
are viscous or plastic stresses, they must be dragged in by extra assumptions having nothing to do with thermodynamic principles 3 • Finally, to obtain equations 
of motion it is customary to apply the Euler-D'Alembert principle to the 
equations of equilibrium, and this is at bottom no different from assuming the 
balance of momentum to start with. 
263. Inequalities restricting the equations of state, I. "Absolute" temperature. 
Thus far in our formal structure the temperature () has been taken as defined 
by (247.1) 1 with no other restriction than that the equations of state be such 
as to permit any number of differentiations and functional inversions. For the 
validity of one or two of the formulae it has been tacitly supposed that () =f= O, 
and at one point in connection with the entropy inequality (258.3) we have assumed that () >O. This last requirement is customarily imposed throughout 
the subject. When the caloric equation of state (246.1) is so restricted that 
()>O, 
1 This is borne out also by general statistical mechanics, whence, as shown by NoLL 
[1955, 19], the field Eqs. (156.5), (205.2), (205.11), and (241.4) followin the greatest generality, 
but the existence of thermodynamical equations for cases other than equilibrium remains 
in doubt. In the kinetic theory of monatomic gases, there is a thermal equation of state in 
all circumstances, but a caloric equation of state is valid only in conditions sufficiently near 
to equilibrium. 
2 Within this Iimitation, CoLEMAN and NoLL [1959, 3] have replaced the analysis in 
this section by a rigorous development based upon a genuine minimum principle; they obtain 
not only the classical stress-strain relations but also full conditions of· stability. 3 Cf. the method of DUHEM [1901, 7, Chap. I, §§ 1- 5] [1903, 4 and 5] [1904, 1. Chap II. 
§V] [1911, 4, Chap. XIV, § 3]. who was a devotee of the thermodynamic approach. Only 
the details, not the principles, of more recent allegedly thermodynamic treatments are different. 
Sect. 264. Stability of equilibrium. 653 
for all allowable values of the thermodynamic state 'fJ, t', then () is said to be an 
absolute temperature. 
It does not seem to be possible within the concepts of thermodynamics to 
give any clear idea of what absolute temperature is1. We may, however, rephrase 
the assumption as follows: the caloric equation of state (246.1) is such that () 
has a finite lower bound. By (247.1h this is equivalent to 
00 = inf ( ;; )., >- oo. (263.2) 
For a given function e ('YJ, v), put 
(263-3) 
Then 
. f ( oe') m 87].,=0. (263.4) 
While, as stated in Sect. 245, the requirements of invariance to which the caloric 
equation of state is subject are not clear, it seems that e' as an internal energy 
function is physically equivalent to e; by (263.4), if () is defined from e' rather 
than from e, we obtain (263.1). Thus for an internal energy function satisfying 
(263.2) it is possible to find a physically equivalent energy function such that 
the temperature is absolute. 
The requirement (263.1) has a simple physical interpretation: Addition of 
heat to a body increases its internal energy. This is so because 'fJ, while itself 
not a measure of heat, is to be interpreted as a quantity which increases or decreases according as heat is being supplied or drawn off. Pursuing this same 
interpretation suggests also the additional restriction 
lim e=oo: (263.5) 
If, at a fixed substate 'L', heat is added indefinitely, the internal energy also 
increases indefinitely. 
264. Stability of equilibrium. At the conclusion of a paper on various forms 
of the "second law of thermodynamics ", CLAUSIUS 2 asserted, "Die Energie der 
Welt ist konstant. Die Entropie der Welt strebt einem Maximum zu." GIBBS 3 
replaced this claim of a trend in time by a definition of thermostatic stability for 
an isolated system: 
(L1H)<t ~ o, (264.1) 
where inequality refers to stable, equality to neutral equilibrium. The symbol L1 
indicates a finite increment, not necessarily a differential, consistent with whatever thermostatic constraints there may be beyond the assignment of a fixed 
energy (f. GIBBS inferred that (264.1) is equivalent to 
(.dG:)H ~ 0: (264.2). 
The energy of an isolated system in stable equilibrium is the maximum compatible 
with its entropy. The argument of GIBBS rests upon a third but unstated idea, 
1 The traditional developments rest upon concepts taken from outside thermodynamics: 
either that temperature is to be identified, or at least connected, with the energy or the mean 
energy of a mechanical model, or that temperature obeys FOURIER's Iaw of heat conduction 
(Sect. 296 below). That (263.1) amounts to a postulated restriction upon the caloric equation of state seems first to have been made clear by HELMHOLTZ [1882, 2, § 1]. 
The criticism in the text, however, does not apply to the method of CARATHEODORY; 
cf. the references cited in footnote 3. p. 617. 2 [1865,1, §17]. 8 [1875, 1, pp. 56-57]. Earlier ideas of Grassonstability will be mentioned in the 
next section. 
654 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The classical Field Theories. Sect. 264. 
that it is always possible to produce changes suchthat L1H and L1Q: are of one sign. 
The numerous applications of these criteria by GIBBS reflect but do not specify 
a broad concept of admissible thermostatic variation. 
GIBBS drew many interesting conclusions from (264.1) and (264.2). E.g., 
from (251.1) 2 we have, when () =const, 
(L1P)o = L1Q:- OL1H, (264.3) 
where Pis the total free energy. From (264.1) and (264.2) we have then 
(L1P)o,lf ~ 0, (L1P)o,H ~ 0. (264.4) 
GIBBS1 inferrred, more generally, that 
(L1P) 8 ~ 0: (264.5) 
In stable equilibrium, the free energy of an isolated system is the least possible 
among all states at the same temperature. GIBBS inferred also that 
(L1Z)o, -r 2:: 0, (264.6) 
where Z is the total thermodynamic potential analogous to (251.6A) 2 • 
The arguments adduced by GIBBS are non-mathematical; in particular, he 
does not define "isolated" and does not specify precisely what variations are 
allowed2• 
There is a conceptually different approach, due, apparently, to PLANCK3• 
The differential equation (247.2), equivalent to the existence of a caloric equation 
of state (246.1), is replaced by a postulated differential inequality: 
l 
()d'YJ ~ de- ~Ta dva, 
a=l (264.7) 
where, of course, the differentials are no Ionger restricted to a path on the energy 
surface; in fact, they may be replaced by finite increments, it being understood 
that the values of () and of Ta are those for the state from which the increments 
are taken. As in Sect. 250, the quantities Ta and () are supposed given a priori, 
since (247.1) can no Ionger be used to define them. When equality holds in 
(264.7), we have the results deduced earlier in this chapter. But, more generally, 
(264.7) is to be regarded, not as a criterion for equilibrium but as a statement 
forbidding certain non-equilibrium states; sometimes taken as an expression of 
the entropy inequality, it bears no·obvious relation to the form (258.3) adopted 
in this work. Neither is its relation to the Gibbsian variations clear, but it enables 
us to derive easily results of the type GIBBS obtained. 
Specifically, we apply (264.7) to three kinds of differential changes: 
1. () ·= const, v = const; then 
l 
(d'f/J)o,u=de- Od'fJ;:;:;; LTadVa =0. 
a=l 
2. 'fJ =const, T=const; then 
l 
(dx)71,-r = de- ~Ta dva;:;:;; Od1J = 0. 
a=l 
3. () = const, T = const ; then 
l 
(dC)o,-r = de- 0 d1J- 2: Ta dva ~ 0. 
1 [1875, 1, pp. 89-91]. 8 Cf. the criticism of DuHEM [1904, 2]. 
8 [1887, .1, § 1]. 
a=l 
(264.8) 
(264.9) 
(264.10) 
Sect. 265. Inequalities restricting the equations of state, II. 655 
That is, in the three conditions stated, the only possible changes are such as to 
decrease 1p, x. C. respectively. These results aresuggestive of GIBBS' criteria (264.5) 
and (264.6). In addition to the difference of concepts used, we note especially 
that in (264.5} no assumption is made regarding the substate, while in (264.8) it 
is held constant. 
In a work in progress, which they have kindly disclosed to us, CoLEMAN and 
Non have taken up the ideas of GIBBS and replaced them by more concrete 
mathematical definitions. They restriet attention to the case of a fluid mixture 
as discussed in Sect. 255, the caloric equation of state being 
(264.11} 
This was the case to which GIBBS generally referred. In effect, CoLEMANandNoLL 
define the dass of all possible variations of an isolated system as the set of all 
configurations leaving fixed the total mass and the positions of the particles 
on the boundary, while conserving mass in such chemical reactions as may 
take place. This definition they render mathematically explicit. They assume 
that (263.1) and (263.5) hold, these being restrictions upon the form of the function on the right-hand side of (246.11). They then replace GIBBS' criteria (264.1) 
and (264.2) by more general ones referring to stable equilibrium of an isolated 
system as a whole: 
Hia:=const = max, 
G:iH=const = min, 
(264.12) 
(264.13) 
where H and (:!; are the total entropy and total energy of the system, and where 
the variations considered are those defined above, subject to the additional restriction indicated in each case. CoLEMAN and Non then give a strict proof 
that (264.12) and (264.13) are equivalent to each other. 
265. Inequalities restricting the equations of state, II. Consequences of the 
stability of equilibrium. GIBBS saw that if the equations of state are such as to 
ensure that every equilibrium state is stable, they must satisfycertaininequalities, 
and these he obtained. Because of the vagueness of his definition of stability, 
however, his argumentsarenot convincing. 
In the work mentioned in the foregoing section, CoLEMAN and N OLL establish 
the validity of GIBBS' inequalities by use of the precisely formulated criterion 
(264.13). Let us write w for the local thermostatic state 'YJ, v, c1 , c2 , ••• , c.l\_ 1 , 
so that the specific energy is given by e(w). Restriding attention to global states 
that are homogeneaus (Sect. 260}, which were those GIBBS customarily considered, CoLEMAN and N OLL prove the following elegant theorem: In order for the 
homogeneaus state characterized by w to be one of stable equilibrium, it is 
necessary and sufficient that 
e(w) < a' e(w') + a" e(w") 
for all pairs (a', a") and (w', w") such that 
a' + a" = 1, 0 < a' < 1, 0 < a" < 1, } 
w = a' w' + a" w", 
(265.1) 
(265.2) 
w' and w" being states. The condition (265.1) asserts a kind of convexity of the 
energy function. While w is a homogeneaus state, w' and w" are not; the energy 
at the homogeneous state w is thus compared with those of allnon-homogeneaus 
states that may arise from intemal fluctuations. 
656 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 265. 
From this theorem, the inequalities of GIBBS follow as special cases. To see 
this, consider a function f(w) of a singlevariable which is subject to a condition 
of the type (265 .1), and take a' = a" =!, w' = w- h, w" = w + h. Then it follows 
from (265.1) that 
f(w + h)- f(w)- [/(w)- /(w- h)] > 0. (265.3) 
When f is twice differentiable, (265.3) implies that f"(w) ~ 0. Conversely, the 
condition f"(x) >O is sufficient, but not necessary, for convexity. Likewise the 
more general condition (265.1) implies that 
II ~w11 u :11 u is positive semi-definite, (265.4) 
where we have put 
OB 
Ga- owa · (265.5) 
This is the result inferred by GIBBS1 • 
Suppose that for a given mixture there exists a convex set of local states w 
such that the homogeneous state corresponding to each is a state of stable 
equilibrium. It follows then from (265 .1) and (265 .2) that for all states ro', w" in 
the set we ha ve 
e (w") - e (w') - (rJ"- rj') e'IJ (w') - l 
.1\-1 
- (v" - v') Ev (w') - ~ (cU( - c~) Ec, (w') > 0, ~=1 ~l 
(265.5 A) 
1 [1875. 1, pp. 111-112]. In his earlier study of simple fluids [1873. 2, p. 29] GIBBS 
had written, "The condition of stability requires that, when the pressure is constant, the 
temperature shall increase with the heat received,-therefore, with the entropy .... It also 
requires that, when there is no transmission of heat, the pressure should increase as the 
volume diminishes ... " l.e., the "condition of stability" is 
(on) ~ 0 
ov 'lj 
(equivalently, 
""~o. <ji~O), 
neutral stability being defined as the case when equality holds instead of inequality. GrBBS 
then discussed the implications of these inequalities upon the topological properties of the 
Euler diagram. He remarked that (onfoTJlv can have any sign, and discussed "the effect 
of heat as increasing or diminishing the pressure when the volume is maintained constant". 
The only significant subsequent work we have found in the general theory of thermodynamic stability is a long study by DuHEM [1893, 2, Part I, Chaps. IV and V]. DuHEM 
considered a system held at fixed temperature subject to constant hydrostatic pressure on 
its boundaries. His definition of stability, accordingly, differs from that of GrBBS, as does 
his choice of variables. COLEMAN and NoLL show, however, that the conditions on the free 
energy function which DuHEM derived as necessary for the stability of a homogeneous 
global state, including (onfoe) 8 c >O, are consequences of (265.1). DuHEM's methods did 
not enable him to derive (265.8); neveriheless, he knew that this equation holds in various 
applications, so he adopted it, calling it "the postulate of HELMHOL TZ". 
DuHEM criticized certain inequalities of GIBBS similar to (265.7)3 [1875. 1, Ineqs. (167). 
(168), (169)]: "une des rares inexactitudes"; also [1893, 2, Part I, Chap. V, §V] [1894, 2, 
Chap. IV, especially §§ 5 and 7] [1898, 2] [1911, §, Chap. XVI, § 9]. Such results are very 
sensitive to the choice of variables, and GrBBS is obscure in the detail of argument as weil 
as reluctant to state just what is being varied. CoLEMAN and NoLL have straightened the 
whole matter out; they find that DuHEM's criticism is weil taken if his interpretation of what 
GrBBS meant to say is correct, but they find another interpretation in which GIBBS' inequalities are correct. 
In summary, there is no conflict between the results of GrBBS and those of DuHEM, which 
complement one another; all their results and many more of like nature are stated unequivocally and derived precisely in the forthcoming work of CoLEMAN and NoLL. 
Sect. 265. Inequalities restricting the equations of state, II. 657 
where the subscripts to c; denote partial derivatives. I t is clear that (265. 5 A), 
for the special variables considered here, is a mathematical statement of the 
physical notions behind (264.7). Thus the approach based upon (264.7), when 
made clear, amounts to an asserting as a postulate the main result GIBBS sought 
to derive. 
For the case of a fluid obeying a caloric equation of state of the form (264.11) 
-the case to which CoLEMAN and NoLL's analysis applies-we have 1 lJ = ((), -n, 
t-t1 ,f1z, ... ,ft~- ), and the matrix occurring in (265.4) assumes the form 
ao ao ao ao 
OrJ ov ocl OCSt-1 
on on on on 
-8r/ ov 
0/l) 
ocl OCft-1 (265.6) 
OrJ 
0/lft-1 
OCSt-1 
where all quantities are taken as functions of 'f), v, c1 , ... , cSt_ 1 • In order that 
this matrix be positive semi-definite, it is necessary that each principal minor 
be non-negative. In particular, 
~) ~ 0, OrJ v, c- (an) ~ O, 
oe ~.c- (265.7) 
The first of these, by (249.1), may be written in the form 2 
. (265 .8) 
that is, in order to increase the temperature of a body held at constant substate, 
it is necessary to supply heat. The second of the inequalities (265.7) may be 
interpreted as a statement that the Laplacian speed of sound is real [ cf. footnote 1, 
p. 631 and (297.13)]. But also all principal minors of (265.6) must be nonnegative; in particular, 
o(n, 0) I ~ O. 
o(rJ, v) c- (265 .9) 
Up to now we have identified the variables constituting the substate, conformaply to the caution stated in Sect. 246. For more general thermostatic 
systems, it is clear that (265 .4) cannot generally hold. For if wb is a suitable 
parameter for describing the state of a system, so also are -w0 and 1/wb; use 
of - wb, leaving all other Wa unchanged, would change the sign of 8aaf8wb, 
and use of 1/wb would change the sign of 8abj8wb. However, it seems likely that 
for some admissible choice of the wb in any system, (265.4) will result, and its 
simplest consequence, 
oaa > O owa = ' 
has often been taken as a condition for stability. 
(265.10) 
1 Note that /l~ = ll'H- llSt, m = 1, 2, ... , S\'- 1, where /l~I is the chemical potential 
defined by (255.2) 2 . In virtue of (158.5) we have 
St St-1 ~ ll'H c'H = ~ ll~ c'1f.. 
'11=1 '11=1 
2 GIBBS [1875. 1, Eq. (166)], HELMHOLTZ [1882, 2, § 1]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. Ill/1. 42 
658 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 265. 
We now translate the condition of stability (265.1) for homogeneous states 
of isolated systems into forms more a~cessible to experimental test. We have 
seen that (265 .4) is a necessary but not sufficient condition for stability; if we 
replace "positive semi-definite" in (265 .4) by "positive definite", we obtain a 
condition which is sufficient but not necessary. We agree to consider this stronger 
condition only1• Also we shall rule out the possibility of thermodynamic 
degeneracy (Sect. 253), and we exclude from consideration states such that 
IDa = 0 or oca = 0, for any a. Also we adopt (263 .1). A system satisfying these 
conditions will be called ultrastable. 
By a weil known theorem on matrices, from (252.11) we see that a necessary 
and sufficient condition for ultrastability is that II <l>abll be positive definite and 
o(T, O)fo(v, 'YJ) >O. From the former statement it follows that ct> >O. By (252.22)a 
we conclude that the latter statement, when the former is satisfied, is equivalent 
to x .. > 0. Hence we have the 
First necessary and sufficient condition for ultrastability: 
ll<l>abll is positive definite, x .. > 0. (265.11) 
Proceeding in just the same way from (252.11) 2 and using (242.22) 5 , yields the 
S econd necessary and sutficient condition for ultrastability 2 : 
u;a bll is positive definite, Xu > 0. (265.12) 
In this condition, ;ab may be replaced by Vab· 
From (265.11) and (252.14) or (252.16), or, alternatively, from (265.12) and 
(252.15), it follows that y> 1. Conversely, if y> 1 and llc!>abll is positive definite, 
from (252.14) or (252.16) it follows that x .. >O, whence by (265.11) the equilibrium is ultrastable. · Thus we have proved the 
Third necessary and sutficient condition for ultrastability: 
llc!>abll is positive definite, y>1. 
In just the same way, from (265.12) and (252.15) we prove the 
F ourth necessary and sutficient condition for ultrastability: 
n;a bll is positive definite, y > 1 . 
(265.13) 
(265.14) 
The stability of thermodynamically degenerate substances requires a separate 
analysis. The particular kind of degeneracy which defines an ideal material 
(Sect. 253) does not affect the arguments given above, so the conditions of 
stability (265.11) to (265.14) remain applicable. For piezotropic substances, by 
(253.9) and (253.10) it is easy to see directly from (252.11) that a necessary and 
sufficient condition for ultrastability is 
llvabll is positive definite, xu>O or x .. >O. (265.15) 
We do not attempt to find conditions appropriate to other degenerate materials 
or to investigate the conditions of neutral stability. 
1 This was done by SAUREL [1904, 6 and 7], who phrased GrBBs' considerations more 
formally in terms of differentials. Our text, in effect, replaces the Gibbs-Saurel arguments 
by more efficient and precise mathematical analysis. It appears that the subtle logical 
difference between stability and ultrastability was recognized by GrBBS, though he did not 
emphasize it; in the work of DuHEM, it is completely obscured, and a reader with modern 
standards of rigor will need to apply some Iabor if he is to disentangle DuHEM's arguments. 3 The condition (265.12h, when f = 1, is traditionally used in analysis of the stability of 
a VAN DER WAALS gas, as was mentioned in Sect. 252. 
Sect. 265. Inequalities restricting the equations of state, II. 659 
An important consequence of (265.12) has been derived by EPSTEIN1• Consider two tensions, Ga andab; then Ga =aa(wa,Wb,wab), ab =ab(wa,wb,wab), where 
wab stands for all wa's except Wa and wb. The Maxwellrelations (252.1) may all 
be expressed in the form 
(265.16) 
Inverting the relation giving ab yields wb = wb(ab,Wa,wab) so that Ga= aa(wa, 
wb (ab, Wa, wab), wab). Differentiating this relation yields 
But 
( oaa ) ( oaa ) ( oaa )' ( owb ) owa oo • ..,ab= owa ..,a + OWb ..,b owa oo • ..,ab' 
0 = (:::Lab= (:::)ab . ..,ab+ ( :: )..,b ( ::J..,a' l = (:::)ab, ..,ab+ ( ~= )...b ( ::~ )...b' 
(265.17) 
(265.18) 
where the second step follows by (265.16). Substituting this result into (265.17) 
yields the identity 
( oaa ) ( oaa ) [( oaa ) 12 ( OWb) owa ab, ..,ab = owa ..,a - owb ..,b -aab ..,b · (265.19) 
By (265.12) we see that the term subtracted is non-negative; hence 
(_!aa ) < (~) . owa D'b, ..,ab= &wa ..,a' (265.20) 
equivalently, 
~) oaa 00, ..,ab >(~) = oll'a ..,a · (265.21) 
The foregoing analysis is due to EPSTEIN, who calls (265.20) and (265.21) the 
restricted Le Chatelier-Braun principle. For the case of a simple fluid, the relation just derived is equivalent to y ~ 1 . 
Whether all inequalities called "conditions of stability" in the Iiterature 
are consequences of GIBBs' condition {265.4) is not certain. 
Further inequalities to be satisfied by the equations of state have been discussed2, but not definitively. 
It is to be noted that equations of state need not satisfy the conditions of 
stability for all values of the thermostatic state. Rather, the conditions serve to 
distinguish stable states from unstable ones. In a theory where mechanical phenomena are of primary interest, it may be natural to seek and impose a require1 [1937. 1, § 143]. 
2 Cf. WEYL [1949, 38, §3]. who treats only the case when f=l, and who proposes also 
the postulate ( ()2~) > 0, i.e., ( :4>) < 0, and derives from it some further inequalities. 
WEYL notes als:~ha1 from (252.3)rit11 follows that ( :; )
11 and (:~ ). cannot vanish simultaneously; hence (265.19) implies th.at ( :; )v and ( :~ t are of one sign. CouRANT and FRIEDRICHS [ 1948, 8, § 2] propose the stronger inequality (~::)'I;::::; o. For the effect of these inequalities in gas dynamics, see § 37 and § 56 of SERRIN's article, Mathematical Principles of Classical 
Fluid Mechanics, This Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII/1. 
42* 
660 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sects. 266,267. 
ment of universal stability, but in a theory aiming to determine criteria of stability 
of equilibrium it is more natural to include the theoretical possibility of unstable 
states1• 
F. Charge and Magnetic Flux. 
I. Introduction. 
266. The scope of this chapter. Classical mechanics is founded on the principles 
of conservation or balance of mass, momentum, moment of momentum, and 
energy. Alongside these mechanical principles we now set up two further principles of conservation as a basis for the theory of electromagnetism. These are, 
the conservation of charge and the conservation of magnetic flux. Subchapter li 
formulates these principles and deduces and interpreis some of their consequences. 
In Subchapter III we introduce an additional postulate, the aether relations, 
and in Subchapter IV we consider the mechanics of the electromagnetic and 
charge-current fields. The sequey1ce of hypotheses and the order of logical development that we adopt here depart from the traditional treatments. A principal objective is to isolate those aspects of the theory which are independent 
of the assigned geometry of space-time.from those whose formulation and interpretation depend on or imply a particular space-time geometry 2• For example, 
we regard the conservation of charge as a physical or intuitive concept logically 
independent of the concepts of rigid rods, uniform clocks, and inertial frames, 
and we have chosen to express this law in a mathematical form likewise independent of the representation of these extraneous entities. 
The development of electricity and magnetism is too closely connected with 
special cases and special phenomena for detailed historical references as in the 
previous chapters tobe practicable here. The central importance of MAXWELL's 
work is well known; in FARADAY and KELVIN he had major predecessors, and the 
classical theory is in part the creation of his successors, HERTZ and LoRENTZ. An 
excellent history has been written by WHITTAKER 3• 
267. Antisymmetrie tensors. Since the only quantities occurring in the conservation laws of electromagnetic theory are antisymmetric tensors, we introduce 
some relevant specific terminology and notation. 
Let 
x''=x''(:x:) (267.1) 
denote an element of the group of analytic transformations of the co-ordinates 
of an n-dimensional space. Let 
U' = u-~u (267.2) 
denote a transformation of the unit 4 U. As U runs over the real numbers, (267.2} 
generates the group of unit transformations on the unit U. 
1 E.g., in gas dynamics the van der Waals equation may be used for the entire density 
range only so long alj the temperature exceeds the critical temperature, while in the theory 
of liquefaction it is tiseful to consider it also below this temperature. 2 Our development. and ordering is similar tothat of KoTTLER [1922, 4]. Forahistory 
of the mathematics and physics leading to Kot"TLER's formulation of the basic equations of 
electromagnetic theory, cf. WHITTAKER [1953, 35, p. 192]. This earlier work includes that 
of HARGREAVES [1908, 5], BATEMAN [1910, l], and MURNAGHAN [1921, 4]. Cf. also the remarks ofW:EvL [1921, 6, § 17]. [1950, 35, § 17]. KOTTLER's ideas were taken upbytheDutch 
school of geometers and mathematical physicists and culminated in the series of papers by 
VAN DANTZIG [1934, 11, '\[ 12] [1937, 10 and 11]. Cf. also ScHOUTEN and HAANTJES [1934, 8]. 
Shortcomings of the metric viewpoint even in strictly mechanical situations are emphasized 
by KRÖNER [1960, 3, § 18]. 3 [1951. 39] [1953. 35]. 
' See Sect. App. 9 for a discussion of units and unit transformations. 
Sect. 267. Antisymmetrie tensors. 661 
A tensor field under the group of analytic co-ordinate transformations having 
absolute dimension [UJ is a set of functions of the co-ordinates :JJ whose law of 
transformation has the general form 
' ' oxm' oxn' ox' t"f"···(:JJ' U')=I(:JJ'/:JJ)I-wsgn(:JJ'/:JJ)PU-----···------, ···fm"···(:JJ U) (267.3) '··· ' oxm ox" ox' • '··· • • 
where (:JJ'/:JJ) denotes the Jacobian of the Co-ordinate transformation. If p =W =0, 
I is called an absolute tensor. If p = 0, w =l= 0, I is called a relative tensor of weight w. 
If p = 1, w =0, I is called an axial tensor, and if p = 1, w=j= 0, I is called an axial 
relative tensor of weight w. 
A covariant or contravariant completely antisymmetric tensor of rank k 
will be called a k-vector. We can restriet the value of k to be less than or equal 
to n since k-vectors suchthat k >n vanish identically. 0-vectors are called scalars 
and 1-vectors are called vectors. 
Weshall be concemed primarily with the following special types of k-vectors: 
1. Absolute covariant or contravariant k-vectors. 
2. Contravariant relative k-vectors of weight + 1. 
3. Covariant relative k-vectors of weight - 1. 
4. Covariant and contravariant axial k-vectors. 
5. Contravariant axial relative k-vectors of weight + 1. 
6. Covariant axial relative k-vectors of weight -1. 
Tensors of types 2 and 3 will be called k-vector densities. Tensors of types 5 
and 6 will be called axial k-vector densities. 
If the group of co-ordinate transformations consists solely of unimodular 
transformations, (:ll' /:JJ) = + 1, then the transformation laws of absolute k-vectors, 
axial k-vectors, k-vector densities and axial k-vector densities coalesce. If the 
group consists solely of transformations with positive Jacobian, then the trans~ 
formation laws of absolute k-vectors and axial k-vectors coalesce, as do the 
transformation laws of k-vector densities and axial k-vector densities. 
In the following definitions, Fand Y stand for k-vectors; they may be absolute, 
axial, densities, or axial densities, but their variance is specified by their indices. 
The dot product of a contravariant k-vector Fand a covariant m-vector Y, k-:?:. m, 
is defined by (cf. Sect. App. 3) 
(267.4) 
(267.5) 
Let e'•'•···'" and e,,,, ... , .. denote the permutation symbols such that e12···" = 
e12 ..... = + 1; these symbols define axial n-vector densities. The duals, dual F 
and dual Y, of covariant and contravariant k-vectors F and Y are defined by 
1 (dual F)'•'•···'"-k = - e'•'•···'n-ks, ... sk F. or k! s,s, ... sk, dualF = E·F, (267.6) 
dual Y=Y·E. (267.7) 
These definitions imply that for any type of k-vector we have 
dual dualF = F. (267.8) 
662 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 268. 
The cross product of a covariant (contravariant) k-vector F and a covariant 
(contravariant) m-vector Y, k +m~ n, is defined by 
1 (F X Y)'•'•···'"-.t-.. = --e'•'•···'"-.t-•••···•.t'•···"" F. y: k! m! ••····~ t, ... lm (267.9) 
(F X Y) r,r, ... rn-.t-m = 
- k! m! -F••····~Y •···"" Bs, ... s.tl1 ••• 1mr1 r1 ••• rn-.t-M . (267.10) 
These definitions generalize that for the cross product of a vector and a tensor 
given in Sect. App. 3. We have the useful identities relating the cross product, 
dot product, and dual: 
Fx Y =(dual Y) ·F, (Fand Y covariant), (267.11) 
Fx Y = Y · dualF, (Fand Y contravariant). (267.12) 
A constant tensor field whose components have the same values in all Coordinate systems related by a group of transformations ~ is called a constant 
invariant tensor ol the group ~- The axial n-vector densities e'•'•···'" and e,,,, ... ,,. 
are constant invariant tensors of the full group of general analytic transformations. The mixed Kronecker deltas .:5~:~::::~: are examples of absolute constant 
invariant tensors of the group of analytic transformations. The covariant Kronecker delta d,. is a constant invariant tensor of the orthogonal group. Since 
the fundamental axial n-vector densities are constant invariant tensors of the group 
of general analytic transformations, the identity (267.8) establishes a one-to-one 
correspondence between k-vectors and their dual (n- k)-vectors which is invariant 
under the group of general analytic co-ordinate transformations. This implies 
that the transformation laws of a k-vector and its (n- k)-vector dual are indistinguishable. For example, suppose that 11 , 12 , ••• , 16 is a set of six functions 
of four Co-ordinates whose transformation law is suitably defined by setting 
l1 = ~~· l2 = ata• Ia = al,. 1, = a2s· ls = a2,. ls = aa,. 
where a is an absolute covariant 2-vector. The same transformation law for the 
f's is obtained by setting 
11 =(dual a) 34 , 12 =(dual a) 42 , Ia =(dual a) 23 , 
1, = (duala)14 , 15 = (duala)31 , 16 = (duala)12 • 
The point we make is analogaus to the better known fact that, under the orthogonal 
group, the transformation laws of covariant and contravariant tensors are indistinguishable. The similarity of the two situations can be made even more 
apparent by noting that a contravariant index may be raised or lowered by the 
Kronecker deltas d,. or d'" and that this process of association is invariant under 
the orthogonal group because the covariant and contravariant Kroneckerdeltas 
are constant invariant tensors of that group. 
268. Invariant integral and differential equations independent of a metric or 
connection. Let o, stand for ojox'. If F is an absolute or axial k-vector field, 
the quantities defined by 
(rotF),s,s, ... s.t = (k + 1) o[,.F.,s, ... s.t] (268.1) 
transform as the components of an absolute or axial (k + 1 )-vector field under 
general transformations of the co-ordinates. Similarly, if Y is a contravariant 
k-vector density or axial k-vector density, the quantities defined by 
(div Y)'•'•···'.t-• = a. Y'•'•···'~-·· (268.2) 
Sect. 268. Invariant integral and differential equations. 663 
transform as the components of a (k -1)-vector density or an axial (k -1)-
vector density. The (k+1)-vector field defined in (268.1) is called the natural 
rotation of the field F, and the (k -1)-vector field defined in (268.2) is called the 
natural divergence of the field Y. Note that the natural rotation is defined only 
for covariant absolute or axial k-vectors and not for covariant k-vector densities 
or contravariant k-vectors of any type. Similarly, the natural divergence is 
defined only for contravariant densities or axial densities. The dual of the natural 
rotation of a covariant k-vector is a contravariant (n- k -1)-vector called the 
curl of F. 
curl F = dual rot F. (268.3) 
Wehave the following identity relating the divergence, curl, and dual of a k-vector: 
curl F = div dual F. (268.4) 
Consider the oriented k-dimensional surfaces in an n-dimensional space 
admitting a parametric representation 
(268.5) 
by piecewise continuously differentiahte functions of the parameters u,., a = 1, 
2, ... , k. We denote such a surface (hypersurface) by ~. If the parameters u 
are transformed by continuously differentiable one-to-one parameter transformations with positive Jacobian 
u"' = u"' (u), (u'ju) > 0, (268.6) 
we obtain another admissible parametrization of the surface 9f given by 
x' = x'(u') = x'(u(u')). (268.7) 
A k-dimensional circuit is an ~ topologically equivalent to the complete 
boundary of a (k + 1)-dimensional interval. 
Let IDl [ ~, U] denote a quantity defined for every ~. We may think of 
IDl[~. U] as a physical quantity having the dimension [U] suchthat for every 
k-dimensional set ~ of events or points in space a value is assigned to it in 
principle. Thus, for example, we may think of IDl as the total charge in a given 
spatial region or as the total charge which has passed through a 2-dimensional 
surface in space in a given interval of time. In the general case, we assume that 
IDl is an additive set function. More specifically, weshall assume that IDl is expressible in the form 
IDl[~. U] = J m(~(u), :::)du1 du2 ... du", (268.8) 
.9'k 
where the integrand is a polynomial in the vectors ~=:. 
Theorem: I f IDl [ ~, U] has the transformation law 
IDl' [ ~, U'] = U IDl [ ~, U] (268.9) 
under independent transformations of the unit U, generat analytic transformations 
of the co-ordinates ~. and transformations of the Parameters u, the set function 
IDl [ ~, U] is expressible in the form 
a-n = __1_ J ...,_ d Y.'•'• .. ·'k = J m · d .9.. .:u~ k! . .. ......... ~ " '" (268.10) 
664 Co TRUESDELL and Ro TouPIN: The Classical Field Theorieso Secto 268. 
wkere m is an absolute covariant k-vector field, of absolute dimension [UJ, independent of tke vectors ::: , and wkere d ~ is tke absolute contravariant k-vector 
defined by 
o x[r, o x'• · o x'k] • d oJ,,r,ooo'k = k I----. 0 • --du1 du2 du" Jk - 0 oul ou2 ouk . . . . (268.11) 
Proof: First consider the invariance of !In under the subgroup of unimodular 
parameter transformations: (u'fu) = +1. Under parameter transformations with 
the co-ordinates held fixed, the quantities ox'fou" transform as a set of n absolute 
covariant vectors in a k-dimensional space. A known theorem of classical invariant theory1 states that every invariant polynomial function of a set of 
n covariant vectors in k dimensions: (n ~ k) under the group of unimodular transformations is reducible to a polynomial in the (~) determinants of the vectors 
taken k at a time. In the present application of this theorem we conclude that 
the integrand of (26808) must reduce to a polyn?mial in the (;) variables 
(268.12) 
The coefficients in the polynomial are at most functions of the co-ordinates 
x'(u). Under parameter transformations with Jacobian not equal to 1, the 
variables D of (268012) transform as relative scalars of weight 1, while the coefficients of these quantities transform as absolute !'!Calarso The invariance of m 
under this larger group allows us to conclude . that . the integrand must reduce 
to a linear homogeneous function of the variables D. Hence we can write !In 
in the form (268.10). The invariance of !In under general analytic transformations 
of the co-ordinates and the quotient rule of tensor algebra allow us finally to 
conclude that the coefficients m,,,,o 0 o't must transform as a covariant tensor. 
Only the antisymmetric part of the tensor of coefficients contributes to the 
transvected sum in (268.1 0); hence, there is no loss in generality by assuming 
that m is a k-vector. On transforming the unit U, we see that the absolute 
dimension of m must be [U] provided we assume that the absolute dimension 
of d ~ is [7]. As explained in Sect. App. 9, c;:o-ordinates and parameterswill always 
be assigned the absolute dimension [7]. The physical dimension of d ~ may 
differ from [7], and the physical dimension of m may differ from the absolute 
dimension of !In; but this problern will be treated in some detaillater in Sect. 277. 
Corollary: I I !In [ 9k, U] is an axial scalar with tke transformation law 
!In[~, U'J = sgn (~'/~) U!m[~, UJ, 
then it is expressible in tke form 
!m[~;U] =Jm-d~, 
wkere m(~(u)) is an axial k-vector. 
The set function !In [ ~, UJ can be written in the dual form 
!In [ ~. U] = (- 1)"(n-k> J (dual m). d,9!, 
(268.13) 
(268.14) 
(268.15} 
where d§;. =dual d9k. In an odd-dimensional space, the factor ( -1 )"(,.-k) = + 1 
for every value of k; however, in even-dimensional spaces, this factor alternates 
in sign as k runs over the integers. 
1 WEYL [1946, 10, p. 45]0 
Sect. 269. Conservative k-vector fields. 665 
Let ~ be a circuit given by x' = x'(tt1, u2, ••• , uk), and Iet it form the complete 
b d f ro • b r '( 1 2 k+I) 'fth t r ox' ox' ox' oun ary o Jk+.l• g1ven y x = x v , v , ... , v ; 1 e vec ors w , 7fl a--z · · · Bk 
o x' o x' 8 x' . . . u . u u 
and the vectors ovf, ~ • · · ~+! have the same onentanon, where w 1s a vector 
directed out of ~+I• we have (Sect. App. 21) 
pm · d~ = Jrotm -d~+I• (268.16) 
where m is a continuously differentiable absolute or axial covariant k-vector 
field in ~+I· The dual form of this fundamental integral identity is 1 
(-)"+I p (dual m) · d~ = J div dual m · d~+I (268.17) 
Substituting from the identity (268.4) we can write (268.17) in the alternative 
form 
(-)"+Ip (dualm) · d~ = J curlm · d~+I· (268.18) 
269. Conservative k-vector fields. In mechanics, if we are given a force field I 
such that 
,~.. f dx' = 0 ':1' ', (269.1) 
for every circuit, the field I is said to be conservative. Vector fields satisfying 
(269.1) play an important role in many physical theories. In other contexts, 
vector fields satisfying (269.1) are called lamellar (see Sect. App. 33). Hereinthis 
chapter we prefer to use the name "conservative" owing to the connection we 
shall establish between the conservation laws of charge and magnetic flux and 
k-vector fields satisfying equations bearing a formal resemblance to (269.1). 
If a vector field satisfies (269.1), there exists an infinity of scalar fields h such 
that zs 
h(~ )- h(~ ) = J I· d~. (269.2) illJ 
where 1 and 2 are the end points of the curve ~(u). At a point where I is continuous, we have 
t, = a,h. (269.3) 
A scalar field h with these properties is called a potential of the conservative fieldf. 
The potential h is not uniquely determined by the field I and these requirements. 
If h is any one field satisfying (269.2), then so also is the field h' given by 
h' = h + const. (269.4) 
We shall now extend the above definitions to k-vector fields in n dimensions. 
Let F denote an absolute or axial covariant k-vector field and Y an absolute 
or axial covariant (k + 1 )-vector field such that 
~F · d~ = f Y · d~+l (269.5) 
for every k-dimensional circuit. We then call Y the source of F. A source-free 
k-vector field F, i.e., one for which Y =0, is called a conservative k-vector field. 
The integral theorem (268.16) states that if F is continuously differentiable, its 
1 The factor (-)"+1 appears here and not in the corresponding formula of ScHOUTEN 
[1954, 21, Chap. II, Eq. (8.14)] because our definitions (267.6) (267.7) of the dual tensors 
differ slightly from his [ibid., Chap. I, Eq. (7.15)]. If we had followed ScHOUTEN's definitions, we should have had to insert a factor (-)10+1 before the right-hand side of the identity 
(268.4). 
666 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 270. 
source Y is given by 
Y = rotF. (269.6) 
Now let F denote a conservative k-vector field so that 
~F-dY',.=O. (269.7) 
If F has continuous derivatives of all orders up top >O, there exists at least one 
(k -1)-vector field K having continuous derivatives of all orders up to p + 1 
such that 
(269.8) 
for every Y;., where 9";,_1 is the complete boundary of 9";. .1 A field K satisfying 
(269.8) will be called a potential of the conservative field F. The field K is not 
uniquely deterrnined by the field Fand (269.8). Given any potential field K of F, 
we obtain any other possible potential by adding to K an appropriate conservative 
(k -1)-vector field. For example, if G is any twice differentiable (k- 2)-vector 
field, then K' given by 
K'=K+rotG (269.9) 
is an alternative potential of the field F. The gmup of transformations relating 
the potentials of a given conservative field will be called the group of potential 
transformations. 
II. The conservation of charge and magnetic flux. 
270. The electromagnetic and charge-current fields and the Maxwell-Bateman 
laws. Space-time is a 4-dimensional space. A point in this space will be called 
an event, whose four real co-ordinates we denote by x 0 , .Q = 1, 2, 3, 42• Quantities 
transforrning as a tensor under the group of general analytic transformations 
of the ~will be called world tensors (cf. Sect. 152). 
W e assign an additive set function (!; [ 9;;, QJ called the charge to every 9;; 
in space-time. We assume that the charge is expressible in the form 
(270.1) 
where lJ is the charge-current field and where Q is the unit of charge. I t follows 
from (268.15) that we can also write (!;[~, QJ in the dual form 
(l;[~,QJ =-J (duallJ) -d~. (270.2) 
The charge (!;[~, Q] is assumed to transform as an axial scalar having absolute 
dimension [0]. Therefore, it follows by the corollary (268.14) that dual lJ is 
an axial 3-vector having absolute dimension [0]. Thus lJ is a vector density 
having absolute dimension [0).3 Under the group of analytic transformations 
of the co-ordinates ~ and the group of transformations 
Q' = o-lQ (270-3) 
1 Throughout this chapter we assume that the underlying space is topologically equivalent to the Euclidean space of the same dimension. For such spaces, the theorem embodied 
in (269.8) follows from WHITNEY's Iemma [1957, 18, § 25]. 2 Henceforth in this chapter Greek indiceswill range over the four values 1, 2, 3, and 4. 3 Our reasons for assuming that the charge transforms as an axial scalar instead of an 
absolute scalar will be explained in Sect. 283. In Sect. 285 we introduce a more general 
expression for the charge. 
Sect. 270. The electromagnetic and charge-current fields. 
of the unit of charge Q, (J has the transformation law 
oxO 
aD' = 01(~'/~)1-1 oxD an. 
·667 
(270.4) 
We now postulate the law oj conservation of charge: the world scalar invariant integral (r[ .9;, QJ vanishes for every 3-dimensional circuit, 
(270.5) 
In a similar fashion we assign to every 9; in space-time a world invariant 
additive set function ~ [ 9;, Cl>] called the magnetic flux and assume tha t magnetic 
flux: is expressible in the form 
(270.6) 
where p is the electromagnetic field and where Cl> is the unit of magnetic flux. The 
magnetic flux and the electromagnetic field have the absolute dimension [ <f> ]. 
Under the group of analytic coordinate transformations of the ~ and the transformations 
Cl>'= <f>-1 Cl> (270.7) 
of the unit of magnetic flux, the electromagnetic field has the transformation 
law 
(270.8) 
We now postulate the law oj conservation of magnetic fluz: the world scalar 
invariant ~ [ 9;, Cl>] vanishes for every 2-dimensional circuit: 
~p·d9;=0. (270.9) 
Eqs. (270.5) and (270.9) are the Cornerstones of electromagnetic theory. The 
laws of nature embodied in these postulates are perhaps the most Iasting achievements of the classical theory of electromagnetism. For the moment we regard 
the charge-current and electromagnetic fields as independent. In Subchapter III 
we shall see the manner in which they are related to one another by an additional 
hypothesis. Also, we shall subsequently give a more general mathematical expression for the law of conservation of charge. The intended generalization, however, involves no new physical idea, and we prefer now to consider the simpler 
Eqs. (270.5) and (270.9), independently of any further physical assumptions or 
increased mathematical generality. When we are on more familiar ground, these 
generalizations may be added with less difficulty and abstractness. 
The world invariant integral equations (270.5) and (270.9) were deduced by 
BATEMANl, who took as a starting point the differential equations commonly 
referred to as MAXWELL's equations. Consistently with the program of Sect. 7, 
we prefer, following KoTTLER2, to announce our basic premises in the stronger 
form of the integral equations (270.5) and (270.9). The acceptance of these 
M~well-Bateman laws may be motivated on the grounds of simplicity and 
the general intuitive notion of conservation. As we shall see, the customary 
field equations and boundary conditions of electromagnetic theory follow as 
consequences of these integral equations if we supply appropriate assumptions 
regarding the continuity of the fields and the nature of the Co-ordinates ~-
1 [1910, 1]. BATEMAN cites the earlier work of HARGREAVES [1908, 5] on invariant integral 
forms. 
2 [1922, 4]. 
668 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 271. 
We trust that our rather abstract postulation of the laws of conservation 
of charge and magnetic flux will not discourage the reader seeking more concrete 
and familiar results. Our main reason for this approach is to emphasize the 
independence of the conservation laws from any geometry of space-time. The ideas 
of conservation as formulated here have, in a certain sense, topological significance, transcending both the intuition and the mathematics of length, time, 
and angles. 
This "metrical independence" of the conservation laws has been noted by VAN DANTZIG 1• 
As he remarks, the concept of metric and the measurement of lengths, angles, and time intervals is perhaps one of the most sophisticated and complex aspects of any physical-theory. 
Furthermore, is not the intuitive notion of conservation of charge, for example, quite independent of measurements of length and time? We view the conservation of charge and magnetic flux as independent of ideas like inertial frames, rigid rods, absolute or uniform time, 
Lorentz transformations, Galilean transformations, etc., and hence as deserving an independent mathematical expression. 
Since there is a one-to-one correspondence between k-vectors and their duals, 
the same physical quantity or physical law involving only k-vectors may be 
expressed in equivalent dual forms. It is a matter of taste and convenience 
which representation is used. Usually the representation involving the fewer 
number of indices is to be preferred. Thus the charge-current field is usually 
represented by a contravariant vector density rather than by the dual covariant 
axial 3-vector. As far as the electromagnetic field is concerned, both cp and dual cp 
are of rank 2, and it is a matter of convention that we tend to favor the covariant 
representation. However, for some purposes, a degree of formal simplification 
is obtained by using one or the other representation, and in what follows we 
do not restriet ourselves to any one particular choice. 
271. Electromagnetic and charge-current potentials. If the electromagnetic 
and charge-current fields are continuous, the Maxwell-Bateman laws (270.5) 
and (270.9) are sufficient conditions for the existence of continuously differentiable fields a; and 11 such that 
J (J. d,§; =- ~"' 0 d~, 
fcp. d~= ~a; 0 d!l;_. 
The integral theorems (268.16) and (268.17) lead to the local relatjons 
(J = div 11, 
In terms of components, we have 
cp =rot a;. 
(271.1) 
(271.2) 
(271.3) 
(}Q=OA'YJDA, (/JuA=20[.o1XLI]· (271.4) 
A contravariant 2-vector density 11 satisfying (271.1) will be called a chargecurrent potential, and a covariant absolute vector a; satisfying (271.2) will be 
called an electromagnetic potential. 
The existence of charge-current potentials '1/ is a consequence of the law of conservation 
of charge. In Subchapter 111 we shall subsequently introduce the aether relations fixing a 
particular charge-current potential in terms of the electromagnetic field. Our procedure 
here is not unlike a procedure sometimes adopted in mechanics, where the stress t's may 
be introduced as a solution of the equations 
fef,dv=~t ,da , 
J (! Z[r /s] dv = p Z[r tPs] dap. 
where the force field (! f is regarded as prescribed (cf. Sect. 203). These equations do not uniquely determine the stress field t since addition of a null stress, i.e., any symmetric tensor 
I [1934, lJj. 
Sect. 272. Field equations and boundary conditions. 669 
satisfying o, t's = 0, to a given Solution of these equations yields another solution (cf. the 
remarks at the end of Sect. 205). Nevertheless, theories of continuum mechanics generally 
e_mploy constitutive equations for the stress which arenot invariant under the process of adding 
a divergence-free symmetric tensor. For the moment we emphasize that the existence of an 
infinity of distinct charge-current potentials follows from the law of conservation of charge. 
Similarly, conserva:tion of magnetic flux is a sufficient condition for the existence of aninfinity 
of distinct electromagnetic potentials provided we assume rather weak continuity properties 
for the electromagnetic field. The group of transformations of the electromagnetic potentials 
has been called the group of gauge transformations 1 . It is customary to render the electromagnetic potential unique by imposing upon it additional restrictions in the form of boundary 
conditions, continuity requirements, and algebraic or differential relations amongst its 
components. Same remarks on these conditions are given in Sect. 276. 
272. Field equations and boundary conditions. If the electromagnetic and 
charge-current fields are continuously differentiable in a region, by applying the 
classical argument based on (268.16) to (268.17) (cf. Sect. 157), from the MaxwellBateman laws (270.5) and (270.9) we derive the jield equations 
div 6 = 0, 
curl fJ! = 0 =dual rot fJ!. 
In terms of components, we have 
Let 
ou an= 0, 
c;n.J'l'€1 O,j CfJ'l'B = 0. 
(272.1) 
(272.2) 
(272-3) 
(272.4) 
(272.5) 
be the equation of a 3-dimensional surface in space-time dividing a region f!A 
into two regions !JI+ and &~-. W e suppose the electromagnetic and chargecurrent fields continuous in the closure of !JI+ and &~- but possibly discontinuous 
at L'=O. We may think of the surface L'=O as the set of events representing 
the history of a 2-dimensional surface in space across which the electromagnetic 
and charge-current fields have finite jumps. Applying the basic integral laws 
(270. 5) and (270.9) to circuits divided by the surface .E = 0, we conclude that 
the discontinuities [dual fJ!] and [ 6] are such as to satisfy the restrictions 
[dual 'f!] · grad .E = 0, } (272.6) [ 6] · grad .E = 0. 
In terms of components, these equations read 
(dual 'f!)nc. od .E = 0, } 
an On .E = 0. (272.7) 
These are the electromagnetic and charge-current boundary conditions. They imply 
that the most general discontinuities in the electromagnetic and charge-current 
fields allowed by the conservation laws are expressible in the form 
[dual ffJ]= ßxgrad.E, 
[6] = w X grad .E, 
or, in terms of components, 
[(dualffJ)n.1]=en.J'l'eß'P8e.E, } 
[an] =-lc:D.J'l'ew.J'P8e.E, 
where ß and w are arbitrary fields defined on .E = 0. 
1 BERGMANN [1942, J, p. 115]. 
(272.8) 
(272.9) 
(272.10) 
670 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 273. 
273. The geometry of space-time, reduction of k-vectors, and the units of length 
and time. So as to obtain equations and results familiar from conventional 
treatments of electromagnetic theory, we now introduce a space-time geometry. 
In Sect. 152 we studied two such geometries based on the idea of the underlying 
Euclidean and Galilean groups of transformations. We showed that the dass 
of Eudidean frames could be defined as the dass of Co-ordinate systems in spacetime for which the space metric g (x) and the covariant space normalt (x) assume 
the canonical forms 
= [b'• o] g 0 0' t = (0, 0, 0, 1). (273.1) 
The subdass of these frames for which the Galilean connection r(x) = 0 were 
identified as the inertial frames of dassical mechanics. The question of inertial 
frames in electromagnetic theory will be taken up in Subchapter III, where we 
shall discuss the Lorentz invariance of the aether relations, Lorentz frames, 
and the relation between these entities and their Galilean counterparts. For the 
remainder of this Subchapter it suffices that we consider the entire dass of reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate systems in space-time characterized by the canonical forms (273.1). In addition to the co-ordinate transformations considered in 
Sect. 152, we shall here consider transformations of the units oflength and time 
L' = L -1 L, T' = r-1 r. (273.2) 
The space metric g will be assigned the absolute dimension [L -2], and the covariant space normalt will be assigned the absolute dimension [T]. Thus, under 
transformations of the co-ordinates ;r and the units of length and time, the 
world tensors g and t have the transformation laws 
g Q'A'( ;r' ' L') = L-2 ox.Q' OXQ ~xA' oxA g QA( X, L) ' l 
oxQ (273.3) 
ttJ' (x', T) = T -
0 xQ' t!J (x, T). 
Recall that ta=o!Jt, where t(x) is the time. The absolute dimensionoft is [T]. 
If g and t are to retain their canonical form (273.1) when the units of length 
and time are changed, the co-ordinates belanging to the two systems of units 
must be related by a transformation of the form 
z'' (L') = L[A'',(t) z'(L) + d'' (t)], } 
z4' (T') = t' = T z4(T) + const = T t + const, (273.4) 
where Ais an orthogonal matrix. Weshall denote the co-ordinates ;r by z and t 
when (273.1) holds. That is, z denotes reetangular Cartesian spatial co-ordinates 
and t = x4 denotes the time. Recall that in Sect. 152 we called a co-ordinate 
system for which we have the canonical forms (273.1), a Euclidean frame. 
Let F denote a covariant world k-vector. Let us denote the components of F 
referred to a Euclidean frame by 
(273.5) 
All the components of F are determined from these particular components. With 
reference to the decomposition (273.5) weshall use the notation 
F = (a, b). (273.6) 
Sect. 273. The geometry of space-time, reduction of k-vectors. 
For a contravariant world k-vector Y we write 
Y = (c, d), 
where 
Note the different position of the index 4 in (273.5) and (273.8). 
671 
(273.7) 
(273.8) 
If Fis an absolute covariant k-vector of absolute dimension [UJ, the transformation laws of its components a and b can be put in the form 
r;r; ... r_t= r; r;··· r_t s,s, ... sk (
273 .
9 a U L ) -kAs• As• Ask a l 
b ,, , -uL-k+lT-lAs~As, Ask-l(b +a ut) '•'•···'k-l- 'i r;. •. 'k-1 s,s, ... sk-1 s, ... sk-lt ' 
where u1==oijoz4 '. Thus the quantities a transform as a 3-dimensional tensor; 
but unless a = 0, the quantities b do not. 
For contravariant absolute k-vectors, the components c and d in (273.8) have 
the transformation laws 
c';r; ... rk =ULk A~: A:: ... A~: (cs, ... sk _ kurs,ds,s, ... skl), l 
d';r; ... r;,_1 = uLk-1 TA'; ... A'; A'.t-1 ds,s, ... sk-1. S1 s1 Sk-1 
(273.10) 
Similar considerations apply in the case of covariant and contravariant axial 
k-vectors, k-vector densities, and axial k-vector densities. For example, if Y is 
a contravariant k-vector density we have 
c';,; ... rk = U u-a r-1 A'; sl A'; Sz . .. A'k sk (cs, ... sk- k urs,d s, ... skl), l 
d';r; ... •A:-1 = ULk-4Ar; A'; ... A'L1 ds,s, ... sk-1. 51 Sa S.t-1 
(273.11) 
For axial k-vectors and axial k-vector densities a factor, det A =± 1, will occur 
in the transformation laws of the Euclidean components. 
The reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates z (L) of a Euclidean frame based on 
the unit of length L are assigned the physical dimension [L J (cf. Sect. App. 9) and, 
consistent with (273.4), z4(T) is assigned the physical dimension [T]. The physical 
dimensions of the components a, b, c, etc., of world tensors referred to a Euclidean 
frame are determined by the absolute dimension of the corresponding world 
tensor, its variance, and its weight by writing the transformation laws for its 
components in the forms (273.9), (273.10), (273.11), etc. Thus if Fis an axial 
or absolute covariant k-vector of absolute dimension [UJ, then 
phys. dim. a = [UL-k], } (273.12) phys. dim. b = [U L -k+I PJ. 
If Y is an absolute or axial contravariant k-vector, then 
phys. dim. c = [ULk], } 
phys. dim. d =[ULk-t T]. 
If Fis a covariant density or axial density, then 
phys. dim. a = [U L -k+a T], } 
phys. dim. b = [U L -kHJ. 
Finally, if Y is a contravariant density or axial density, then 
phys. dim. c = [U Lk-a r-1], } 
phys. dim. d = [U U-4] • 
(273.13) 
(273.14) 
(273.15) 
672 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 274 
Consider a world covariant k-vector or axial k-vector F and a world covariant 
(k -1)-vector or axial (k -1)-vector G such that 
F =rotG. 
Let 
F = (a, b), G = (g,h). 
We shall then have 
a =rotg, b =roth+ (-1)k-1 ~~, 
or, equivalently, 
duala = curl g, dual b = curlh + (-1)k-1 o(d~~Ig). 
(273.16) 
(273.17) 
(273.18) 
(273.19) 
274. The charge density, current density, electric field, and magnetic flux 
density. If we assume the geometry of space-time to be Euclidean in the sense 
of Sect. 152, then we can apply the considerations of Sect. 273 to a reduction 
of the charge-current and electromagnetic fields into four distinct fields. Refer 
the electromagnetic field p and the charge-current field to a Euclidean frame, and 
set 
p = (dualB,E), lJ = (J, Q), (274.1) 
where B is called the density of magnetic flux, E the electric field, J the current 
density, and Q the charge density. From the rules for determining the physical 
dimensions of these quantities given in Sect. 273 we get immediately, 
phys. dim. B = [ <f> L-2], l 
phys. di~. E = [ <J> L -1 PJ, 
phys. d1m. J = [0 L -2 r-1], 
phys. dim. Q = [0 L-3]. 
(274.2) 
Let vn be the world velocity field of a motion as defined in Sect. 152. In 
terms of v, the electromagnetic field, and the charge-current field, we can define 
the space tensors 
(274-3) 
Recall that a space tensor was defined in Sect. 152 as a contravariant world 
tensor for which pnA · · · tn = pAn · · · tn = · · · = 0. A k-vector which is a space 
tensor has the representation 
F = (c, 0), (274.4) 
so that, according to (273.10) and (273.11), c transforms as a 3-dimensional 
Cartesian tensor. If we refer the components of lf and il to a Euclidean frame, 
we get 
lf =~+~X B, 0) _ (lf, 0), } 
il-(J Q V, 0) - (il, 0), (274.5) 
where i = E +v X Bis called the electromotive intensity at a point moving with 
the particles of the motion, and il = J- Qv is called the conduction current 
relative to the particles of the motion. The electromotive intensity and the conduction current of a motion transform as vectors under time-dependent transformations of the spatial coordinates. However, one should note that the electric 
field and current density do not transform as vectors under transformations 
between co-ordinate frames in relative motion. Thus, if the electric field and 
current density vanish in one Euclidean frame, they need not necessarily vanish 
Sect. 275. The 3-dimensional integral form of the laws of conservation. 673 
in every Euclidean frame. A distribution of charge in one frame will constitute 
a current density in a frame in relative motion. Similarly, a density of magnetic 
flux in one frame will be interpreted as an electric field in a frame in relative 
motion. However, if the density of magnetic flux and the density of charge 
vanish in one Euclidean frame, they vanish in every Euclidean frame. 
275. The 3-dimensional integral form of the laws of conservation of 
charge and magnetic flux. Consider first the 3-dimensional circuits in spacetime formed by 3-dimensional tubes 
(Sect. App. 29) of the world velocity 
field v defined by a given motion 
closed on either end by surfaces lying 
in the instantaneous spaces t (x) = t1 
and t(x) =t2 • (See Fig. 44.) If we 
apply the law of conservation of 
charge (270.5) to such a circuit and 
refer all quantities to a Euclidean 
frame, we get 
t, t, 
J Qdv] + J dt~!J·da = 0, (275.1) 
" t, t, !:I' Fig. 44. Tube of integration in Eq. (275.1). 
where v is a spatial region moving with the particles of the motion and 9" is its 
complete boundary. Set LI t = t2- t1 and consider the limit 
(275 .2) 
If the limits of the two terms exist separately, we get 
:tJQdv+~!J·da=O, (275.3) 
which has the traditional form of an equation of balance when sources are 
excluded (cf. Sect. 157) and puts the law of conservation of charge in terms 
easy to understand. The conduction current relative to the particles 1 of the 
motion is the efflux of chargeout of the moving region through its boundary. 
Consider next the 2-dimensional circuits in space-time formed by segments 
of 2-dimensional tubes of the world velocity field closed on either end by surfaces 
lying in the instantaneous spaces t (x) = t1 and t (x) = t2 • If we apply the law 
of conservation of magnetic flux (270.9) to such a circuit and refer all quantities 
to a Euclidean frame, we get 
f 2 ta 
fB·d(l] + fdt~fi·dX =0, (275.4) 
!:I' t, t, '{/ 
where 9" is a 2-dimensional surface in space moving with the particles of the 
motion and ~ is its complete boundary. Applying a limit argument as in (275.2), 
we then get 
(275.5) 
1 These particles are defined mathematically by integration of the given velocity field 
and are a convenient device for visualizing it; they need not be mass-bearing. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. lll/1. 43 
674 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN:The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 276 
which is the traditional form of Faraday's law of induction for moving circuits. 
If we apply (270.9) to a 2-dimensional circuit which lies in the surface t (~) = const 
(Fig. 45) we get the condition 
pB-da =0. (275.6) 
A visualization of FARADAY's law of induction is obtained by introducing 
the notion of lines of magnetic flux or lines of induction. The number of lines of 
magnetic flux threading a closed curve in space is measured by the integral J B ·da, where [/ is any surface having 
the curve for its boundary. Eq. (275.6) states that this measure is independent of the choice of [/ and depends only on 
the curve. FARADAY'S law of induction states that the time 
rate of change of the total number of lines of magnetic flux 
threading a moving circuit is measurde by the negative line 
integral of the electromotive intensity around the moving circuit. 
Since we have (275.)), (275.5), and (275.6) for any motion, 
Fig.45. surtaceofinte· the corresponding laws for circuits which are at rest in some 
gration in Eq. (275·
6l· Euclidean frame follow as a special case by setting v' = 0. 
276. The 3-dimensional integral form of the potential equations. Let the components of the electromagnetic potential and the charge-current potential in a 
Euclidean frame be denoted by 
Cl= (A,- V), 1'1 =(dual H, D), (276.1) 
where A is called the magnetic pote11.tial, V the electric potential, H the current 
potential, and D the charge potentiall. 
If we apply the world invariant equations (271.1) and (271.2) to circuits in 
space-time constructed in a manner similar to those used to obtain (275.)), 
(275.5), and (275.6), we obtain the equations 
J~·da=~(H+Dxv)·da- :tJD·da, (276.2) 
JQdv=pD·da, (276.)} 
JB·da=pA·da, (276.4) 
~ ~ 
Ji·da=- :tJ A·da+(A·v-V)], (276.5) 
•• 
where z1 and z2 denote the end points of the moving curve c. 
Eq. (276.2) will be called the current equation, and (276.)) will be called the 
charge equation 2• 
The potential equations for stationary circuits follow simply by setting v' = 0. For the 
classical theory, (276.4) and (276.5) are less used than are the current and charge equations, 
although the introduction of magnetic and electric potentials and their relative importance 
1 The axial vector H is generally called the "magnetic field intensity" and the vector 
density D the "electric displacement". Since the charge-current field and the electromagnetic field have not been related to one another in any way, this customary terminology 
would be inappropriate for our purposes here. The conventiooal names for the magnetic 
potential A and the electric potential V of the electromagnetic field are appropriate and 
suggestive, and we have assigned names to H and D an the basis of their similar relation 
to the charge-current field. The terms "magnetic field intensity" and "electric displacement" 
will take an their proper connotation after we introduce the aether relations in Subchapter III. 
2 Eq. (276.2) is HERTz's form of the current equation for moving circuits. HERTZ [1900, 
4, Chap. XIV], WHITTAKER [1951, 39, pp. 329-331]. 
Sect. 277. Time derivatives of scalar integrals over moving curves, surfaces, and regions. 675 
is a matter of debate. The charge and current potentials Hand D play a more fundamental 
role in the classical theory than do the magnetic and electric potentials A and V. MIE and 
DIRAC1 have proposed theories of electromagnetism in which the four potentials H, D, A, 
and V enter the theoretical structure on a more equal footing. However, in most treatments 
of the classical theory, the magnetic and electric potentials are introduced as auxiliary fields, 
determined only to within a gauge transformation. Additional restrictions are often imposed 
in the form of boundary conditions, continuity requirements or algebraic and differential 
relations between the four fields A1 , A2 , A3 , and V. For example. many authors introduce 
the "gauge condition" V= 0, while others impose the "Lorentz gauge condition" div A + 
c-2 ~ = o. MAXWELL 2 .imposed the condition div A = 0 and called A the electromagnetic ot 
momentum. Perhaps a suitably "gauged" electromagnetic potential and the ideas of MIE 
and DIRAC will serve as the basis of a better theory of electromagnetism. We do not take 
up these questions, resting content with our choice of charge and magnetic flux as the fundamental quantities entering the equations of conservation. 
277. Time derivatives of scalar integrals over moving curves, surfaces, and 
regions. The electromagnetic equations for moving circuits involve the time 
derivatives of scalar integrals having the form 
~ = k\ J F,,,, ... ,kdY{•'•···'k = J F · dY" = J (dualF) ·dfi{, (277.1) 
where Fis a 3-dimensional k-vector (k =0, 1, 2, or 3) and .9k is a spatial region, 
surface, or curve moving with the particles of a motion with velocity field v' 
in a Euclidean frame. Now the motion can be presented in the form z'=z'(ZK, t) 
where the zK are material Co-ordinates. In general, the k-vector field F depends 
explicitly on the time t as weil as the spatial co-ordinates z. The surface .9k 
is given by parametric equations 
z' = z' (u1, u2, ... , uk, t) = z' (ZK (u), t). (277.2) 
The limits of integration (277.1) correspond to fixed values of the Z and u independent of the time t. Thus we can write 
!!Sl_ = ~1 ()FK,K, ... Kk df/'.K,K, ... Kk 
at k! ot k (277.3) 
provided that the field F and the motion z (Z, t) are continuously differentiable. 
In (277.3), the FK,K, ... Kk are defined by 
oz'• oz'• oz'k P,KK K =----•••---F. ' •··· k- ezK, ezK, ezKk '•'•···'k' (277.4) 
and d.9J.K,K, ... Kk is the corresponding transform of dSJ.•'•···'k. lf follows from 
(277.3) and the results in Sect. 150 that d~jdt can be written in the form 
d;J - ~j~F. df/'.'•'•···'k dt - k! dt '•'•···'k k ' (277.5) 
where dßfdt denotes the convected time-flux of the k-vector field F. 
We can also write d~fdt in the dual form 
d;J }. d ~ dt = d~ (dualF) · dY". (277.6) 
Now the convected time-flux of an absolute or axial k-vector field has the particularly simple form 
d 8F 8F -ftF = Tt + v · rotF + rot(v · F) = Tt + curlFxv + rot(v · F). (277.7) 
1 [1912, 6]; [1951, 5]. 
2 [1881, 4, § 618]. 
43* 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 278. 
Similarly, the convected time-flux of a contravariant k-vector density or axial 
density has the simple form 
:; (dual F) =dual (div dual F x v) + curl (dual F X v). (277.8) 
One can easily verify that 
dual a~; = :~ dual F. (277.9) 
Let us set F- dual F. Eqs. (277.7) and (277.8) written in terms of components 
are 
The foregoing integral formulae and vector indentities are useful for the study 
and interpretation of the electromagnetic equations for moving circuits. In what 
follows we shall also need to consider a moving surface given in the form of an 
equation 
E(z,t) =0, (277.12) 
where z denotes the reetangular Cartesian spatial co-ordinates of a Euclidean 
frame, and t denotes the time. The vector n defined by 
8,E ( ) n, = 277.13 
V85E85 E 
is called the instantaneotts unit normal to the moving surface E = 0, and the 
quantity s defined by 
(277.14) 
is called the speed ( cf. ( 177.5)) of the surface E = 0 relative to the reference frame 
(z, t). The quantities n and un may be regarded as the Euclidean components of 
the world vector 
8aE 
va = --::Vrcg=;cLl~e~aLl~Ec===a=ec=:E (277.15) 
That is, in the notation of Sect. 273 
v = (n, -un). (277.16) 
278. Field equations and boundary conditions in 3-dimensional form. The 
3-dimensional form of the field equations and boundary conditions may be obtained 
in two ways. One method is to work with the 3-dimensional integral equations 
(275-3), (275.5), (275.6), (276.2) to (276.5). By assuming the fields in these equations continuously differentiable, one can use the results of Sect. 277 to express 
the time derivatives of integrals over moving surfaces, curves and regions in 
terms of the convected time-flux. Then, by appropriate application of the fundamental integral theorem, line integrals can be transformed into surface integrals, 
surface integrals into volume integrals, etc. Various terms cancel and, by the 
usual type of limit arguments, certain local conditions in the form of partial 
Sect. 279. The 3-dimensional form of the aether relations. 677 
differential equations follow from the integral equations. Boundary conditions 
in 3-dimensional form follow by applying these same integral equations to 
appropriate circuits divided by a surface of possible discontinuity. A simpler 
and more direct method applies the reduction formulae derived in Sect. 273 to 
the world tensor field equations and boundary conditions already obtained. By 
this latter method we obtain as an immediate consequence of the field equations 
(272.1) and (272.2): 
d. J oQ 
lV +Bt =0, 
aB 
curlE + aT = o, 
divB =0. 
The field equations (271.3} yield the relations 
Q =divD, 
an J=curlH-at, 
B =curlA, 
aA E = ---grad V. ae 
(278.1} 
(278.2} 
(278.3) 
(278.4} 
(278.5) 
(278.6) 
(278.7) 
Fig. 46. Geometry of an electromagnetic discontinuity. 
Eq. (278.1} is the differential or local form of the law of conservation of charge, 
and (278.2} is the differential form of FARADAY's law of magnetic induction. 
The 3-dimensional forms of the boundary conditions follow easily from the 
world tensor equations (272.6) and the definitions (277.13) and (277.14) of the unit 
normal n and the speed un of a moving surface of discontinuity1. 
nx [E]- un[B]= 0, 
[B]·n =0, 
[J]·n- un[Q] = 0. 
(278.8} 
(278.9} 
(278.10) 
Eq. (278.8) implies that the most general discontinuities in the magnetic 
flux density and the electric field allowed by the law of conservation of magnetic 
flux are expressible in the form 
[E] =ln-unk, 
[B] =kxn, 
(278.11} 
(278.12} 
where the fields I and k are arbitrary fields defined on the surface of discontinuity. 
We see that conservation of magnetic flux restricts considerably the geometry 
of any electromagnetic discontinuity. Eq. (278.9) demands that any discontinuity 
in the magnetic flux density be transversal. For a stationary surface of discontinuity, we have un =0, and from Eq. (278.8} it follows that the discontinuity in 
the electric field is longitudinal. If the surface of discontinuity is moving, the 
discontinuity in the magnetic flux density must be normal to the plane determined 
by the discontinuity in the electric field and the normal n (see Fig. 46). 
111. The Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations. 
279. The 3-dimensional form of the aether relations. In all that precedes, 
we have treated the electromagnetic and charge-current fields as independent. 
We now introduce a fundamental relation between these fields by postulating the 
Mazwell-Lorentz aether relations. 
1 LuNEBERG [1944, 9, p. 21] has obtained these boundary conditions holding at a moving 
surface of discontinuity in the e!ectromagnetic field by other means. 
678 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 279. 
So as to introduce the aether relations in their simplest and most farniliar 
form, we shall· begin with a statement of thein in terms of the vector fields E, 
B, D, and H. First of all, we assume the existence of at least one Euclidean 
frame in which the Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations 
(279.1) 
are valid. The quantities e0 and f1o are fundamental constants depending 
only on the units of length, time, charge, and magnetic flux. That is, we 
assume the existence of at least one Eudidean frame in which a charge potential 
D is proportional to the electric field E and in which a current potential H is 
proportional to the magnetic flux density B. Now it is easy to show that if the 
Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations (279.1) hold in one Euclidean frame, they cannot hold generally in every Eudidean frame. To see this, simply consider the 
transformation laws of the four fields E, B, H, and Dashave been determined 
in Sect. 273. These can be written in the form 
D'=D E'=E,+uxB, l 
B'=B, 
H'=H-·uXD, 
(279.2) 
from which it is immediately plain that the aether relations cannot hold 
generally and simultaneously in Euclidean frames in relative motion. Thus the 
M axwell-Lorentz aether relations are not Euclidean nor even Galilean invariants. 
If we adopt the aether relations we see that the equations of electromagnetic 
theory will not have the same form in every Euclidean frame, or more importantly, 
they will not havc the same form in every Galilean frame, as do the equations of 
dassical mechanics. Thus it appeared, from the dassical point of view, that if 
the aether relations could be verified in some selected and preferred inertial 
frame, then by a simultaneaus application of the laws of mechanics and electromagnetic theory one should be able to detect the relative motion of inertial 
frames. To put it otherwise, the aether relations determine a preferred dass 
of Euclidean frames all at rest relative to one another. It may also be assumed 
for our purposes here that this preferred dass of frames are inertial or Galilean. 
In Galilean frames which are in motion relative to this preferred dass, the aether 
relations do not generally hold. This gives rise in a natural way to the notion of 
an" aether". That is, we may think of the preferred inertial frames for which the 
aether relations are valid as the dass of inertial frames in which the "aether" 
is at rest. In all other inertial frames, there will be an "aether wind", controverting the validity of the simple relations (279.1). 
Matter resides in an aether characterized by the relations (279.1). These relations are not to be regarded as constitutive equations for matter. We may 
think of them as constitutive relations for the aether. Allow us to remind the 
reader already familiar with the dassical theory of dielectric and magnetic 
materials that the aether relations apply only to the charge and current potentials 
of the resultant charge and current distribution of all kinds of charge and current. 
Charge and current distributions arising from the polarization and magnetization 
of a material medium are to be induded in the charge-current field 6, and (H, D) 
is a resultant potential. 
Sect. 280. The world tensorform of the Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations. 679 
We shall enlarge on this point in Sect. 283. Here it suffices that our intuitive motivation 
for adopting the aether relations {279.1) as valid both inside and outside of "matter" is 
based on the guiding principle used by LoRENTz [1915, 3]. In LoRENTz's theory, matter is 
regarded as a collection of charged point particles which exist and move through an aether 
or vacuum whose properties are unaffected by the presence or motion of the particles. Here 
we treat matter as a continuous medium but carry over the Lorentz hypothesis that the 
aether relations are unaffected by the presence of matter. The effects of polarization and 
magnetization in the Lorentz electron theory were determined by arguments based on a 
particle model of a dielectric and magnetic material medium. A treatment of these effects 
regarding matter as a continuous medium is given in Sect. 283. 
At the same time, we give warning that the aether relations represent an 
assumption not adopted in every existing theory of electromagnetism1, whereas 
the conservation laws of charge and magnetic flux are, to our knowledge, common 
to all. Thus the considerations of this subchapter are of a rather special nature, 
and we have attempted to present but one point of view. The principal objective 
of the chapter as a whole is to formulate and develop the conservation laws of 
electromagnetic theory. These laws hold independently of the aether relations 2, 
and the contents of this subchapter do not in any way restriet the considerations 
in Subchapter II. 
280. The world tensor form of the Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations. Let the 
constant c2 be defined by 
(280.1) 
The fundamental nature of this constant will become apparent as we proceed; 
it is called the square of the speed oflight in vacuum. Consider a space-time coordinate system (z, t) for which the aether relations are valid. As we have seen, 
from the classical view of space-time geometry the frame (z, t) will be one of 
a restricted subdass of all Galilean and Euclidean space-time frames. Consider 
a world contravariant, absolute, symmetric tensor of rank two whose components 
in the frame (z, t) have the particular values 
(280.2) 
Now the components of a tensor in a general system of co-ordinates are determined 
uniquely by its transformation law and its components in any one co-ordinate 
system, so that (280.2) determines the components of y in every space-time Coordinate system. The determinant of the inverse y of y is given by 
det y = - c2 (280.3) 
in the frame (z, t) and transforms as a scalar density of weight 2 under general 
transformations of the co-ordinates. Now consider the world tensor equation 
r;!M =V8 o (- dety)fyD'l'yLieiP'l'e· 
flo 
(280.4) 
By the quotient rule of tensor algebra, we easily verify that (280.4) is indeed a 
tensor equation; i.e., the rank and weight of both sides of the equation agree. 
1 ABRAHAM [1909, J] reviews several of the points of view regarding the aether relations 
in material media. 2 A similar distinction was made in Chap. E, where developments resting on an equation 
of state were separated from the general theory of energy. Cf. the remarks at the end of 
footnote 5. pp. 617-618. 
680 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Ciassical Field Theories. Sect. 281. 
Since it is a tensor equation, it will be satisfied in every Co-ordinate system if 
it is satisfied in one Co-ordinate system. In the frame (z, t) where the r have the 
values (280.2), we can verify that the tensor equation (280.4) is satisfied if the 
Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations (279.1) are satisfied. Thus we call (280.4) the 
world tensorform of the Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations. 
For some purposes it proves convenient to write (280.4) in a somewhat different form. Consider the world contravariant tensor of weight l defined by 
-1 - 1DLI 
@!M =='= y . 
V-detf (280.5) 
-1 
The determinant of ~ is an absolute world scalar having the value - 1 in every 
co-ordinate system. We find that the aether relations can be put in the alternative invariant form 
V
--1 -1 
'YJ!M == ~ @D'P @LIS !f''PS. 
flo 
-1 -1 
In the frames where r has the specialform (280.2), ~will have the form 
~ = Vc [ d~ • - o ;2]· 
(280.6) 
(280.7) 
281. Dimensional transformations and the aether relations. The absolute 
dimension of the world tensor fields a, p, 'rj, and cx are given by 
abs. dim. a = [0], 
abs. dim. 'r/ = [0], 
abs. dim. p = [<!>], } 
abs. dim. cx =[<I>]. (281.1) 
From these dimensions and the rules of Sect. 273 follow the physical dimensions 
of the fields B, E, J, Q, D, H, A, and V. Some of these have been stated elsewhere already, but we shall list all of them now for easy reference: 
phys. dim. B =[<I> L -2], 
phys. dim. J = [OL-2T-1J, 
phys. dim. D = [OL-2], 
phys. dim. A =[<I> L-1], 
phys.dim.E= [<J>L-1T-1], l 
phys. dim. Q = [OL -s], 
phys.dim.H= [OL-IJ-1], 
phys. dim. V = [ <!> r-1] . 
(281.2) 
Thus, in order that the aether relations be invariant under independent transformations of the units of length, time, charge, and magnetic flux, we must have 
phys. dim. e0 = [ <J>-1 0 L -1 T], phys. dim. #o = [ <1> o-1 L -1 T]. 
The constant c defined in (280.1) has, therefore, the dimension 
phys. dim. c = [L r-1]. 
(281.3) 
(281.4) 
The dimension of the constant l [i; occurring in the world invariant forms of v;.; the aether relations (280.4) and (280.6) is given by 
phys. dim. V eo = [0 <J>-1]. 
flo 
(281. 5) 
The absolute dimension and physical dimension of absolute world scalars and 
constants are equal. From (281.5) and (280.6) we see that dimensional invariance 
Sect. 282. The Lorentz invariance of the Maxwell-Faraday aether relations. 681 
of (280.6) requires that 
abs. dim. 6; = 1 , (281.6) 
which is consistent with the fact that the determinant of this tensor has the 
value - 1 in all co-ordinate systems and unit systems. Dimensional invariance 
of the canonical form (280.2) requires that 
abs. dim. y = [L - 2]. (281.7) 
Of course, this requires that the absolute dimension of the inverse y be [L 2]. 
When magnetic flux, charge, length, and time are measured in units of 
Q = 1 Coulomb, <l> = 1 Weber, L = 1 Meter, T = 1 Second, (281.8) 
the fundamental constants in the aether relations have the values1 : 
e = 8_854 X 10_12 Coulomb-Second 
O Weber-Meter ' 
= 1.257 X 10_6 Weber-Second 
flo Coulomb-Meter ' 
C = 2.998 X 108 _M~ter_ Second ' 
(281.9) 
V e0 = 2_654 X 10_3 Cou!omb . 
P.o Weber 
282. The Lorentz invariance of the Maxwell-Faraday aether relations, Lorentz 
transformations, and Lorentz frames. In Sect. 152 we showed that the Galilean 
(inertial) frames of classical mechanics could be characterized as the preferred 
co-ordinates in space-time for which the world tensors g!M, tA, and the Galilean 
connection r assumed the canonical forms 
g =[do" oo]' t = (0, 0, 0, 1), (282.1) 
The Co-ordinates of any two such frames must be related by a Galilean transformation having the form 
z'' = A'~ z' +ur' z"' + const, } 
z"'' = z4 + const, 
(282.2) 
where A is an orthogonal matrix and the u'' are constants representing the 
relative velocity of the two Galilean frames. If we also consider transformations 
of the units of length and time and assign g the absolute dimension [L - 2] and 
t the absolute dimension [T], the co-ordinates of a Galilean frame based on the 
units of length L and T are related to the co-ordinates of a Galilean frame based 
on the units L' and T' by a transformation of the form 
z''(L') =L(A•;z'(L) +u''z4 (T) +const),} (282.3) z"'' (T') = T (z4' (T) + const). 
So as to distinguish these more general transformations from those having the 
special form (282.2), we shall call (282.3) a generalized Galilean transformation. 
Following the same general procedure outlined above for the case of Galilean 
space-time, let us consider the co-ordinate transformations and space-time frames 
1 These values are quoted from STRATTON [1941, 8, p. 601]. 
682 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 282. 
defined by the canonical form (280.2) of the Lorentz tensor r. A Co-ordinate transformation which leaves the Lorentz tensor invariant must satisfy the equations 
" .Q' ., <1' -l.Q'<1'(L' T') = L_2 _u_x _ _ v_x_-l.Q<1 (L T) y ' oxD ox<1 y ' ' (282.4) 
where 
-1 
y (L,T) = [!5" 0 - 0 
~2 l , [ -y, (L', T') = - !5' s 0 __E._ l • 
0 c2 L2 
(282.5) 
Since the ·:./ and y' are constants, it follows that the co-ordinate transformation 
must be linear. A coordinate transformation satisfying the (282.4) will be called 
a generalizecl Lorentz transformation. One can deduce the general form of these 
transformations by multiplying the well known special Lorentz transformation 1, 
Z~= (282.6) 
by an orthogonal transformation of the spatial Co-ordinates, simple extensions 
of the co-ordina tes corresponding to transformations of L and T, and by time 
inversions. The generalized Lorentz transformations have the form 
z'' (L') = LA'~{Ws + (C- 1) u-2 u' u.] z• (L) -Cu' z4 (T)}, ) 
z4 '(T') =±TC {z4 (T)- -}u,z'(L)}, (
282·7) 
where Ais an orthogonal matrix, C = ( 1 - :: r~. and u2 == u, u' < c2 is the squarecl 
relative speecl of the two Lorentz frames. 
Various subgroups of the group of generalized Lorentz transformations have received 
special attention and special names. If we keep the units of length and time fixed, so that 
L = T = 1 in (282.7), we get what has been called the extended Lorentz group 2 • If we transform the units of length and time by the same factor so that L = T and c is invariant, we 
get what BATEMAN3 has called the group of spherical wave transformations. This subgroup 
is also called the conformal Lorentz group. BATEMAN noted that the aether relations are 
invariant under the group of spherical wave transformations. If we require that det A = + 1 
and disallow time inversions corresponding to the minus sign in (282.7) 2 , we get the proper 
Lorentz transformations. On writing the aether relations in the form (280.6), we see that 
they are invariant under the conformal Lorentz group. 
A Lorentz transformation with ufc <{::: 1 approximates a Galilean transformation. In 
special relativity theory, the notion of a stationary aether is abandoned. The inertial frames 
of relativistic mechanics are identified with the Lorentz frames. The equationsand definitions 
of mechanics are revised so as to be Lorentz invariant rather than Galilean invariant as in 
classical mechanics. 
The world invariant form of the aether relations (280.6) provides us with our principal 
motivation for assuming that the charge ([ [( .9"3 , O)] transforms as an axial scalar rather 
than as an absolute scalar under general transformations of the space-time coordinates. 
With magnetic flux an absolute scalar and charge an axial scalar as we have assumed, the -1 
transformation law of the tensor density (f) is 
(282.8) 
Had we assumed that both charge and magnetic flux were absolute scalars, the charge-current -1 
potential 11 would have been an axial density. The transformation law (280.8) for the (f) 
1 See, for example, BERGMANN [ 1942, J]. 2 CORSON [1953, 6, Chap. 1]. 
3 BATEMAN [1910, J]. 
Sect. 283. Polarization and magnetization. 683 
would then have involved the square root of the Jacobian rather than the square root of 
-1 
the absolute value of the J acobian. Thus, in some coordinate systems, the coefficients 6) 
would have been imaginary or complex-valued. We have considered this undesirable. 
Another motivation for assuming charge to be an axial scalar is that the current density J 
and the charge density Q, being tensor densities under time-independent transformations 
of the spatial co-ordinates when this assumption is adopted, transform as absolute tensors 
under the group of time independent orthogonal transformations of the spatial co-ordinates. 
This is the transformation usually assumed for these quantities in traditional treatments of 
electromagnetic theory. The distinction between axial tensors and absolute tensors and the 
distinction between axial densities and densities is made necessary only because we find the 
consideration of improper co-ordinate transformations to be of some major concern in many 
physical theories. It is for this reason that we did not restriet ourselves at the outset to 
the group of proper co-ordinate transformations. 
283. Polarization and magnetization. a.) The principle of Ampere and Lorentz. 
Polarization and magnetization are auxiliary fields introduced into the general 
theory so as to serve in formulating constitutive relations for special types of 
materials called dielectrics and magnets or magnetic materials. In the classical 
theory of dielectrics and magnets, surfaces across which the electromagnetic 
properties of the medium change abruptly are important for the description 
of many electromagnetic phenomena. These surfaces are most often associated 
with surfaces of discontinuity in the polarization and magnetization. Sudaces 
of discontinuity in the polarization and magnetization are in turn associated 
with surface distributions of charge and current. The point of view we adopt 
here is that charge and current are the fundamental entities while polarization 
and magnetization are simply auxiliary fields introduced as mathematical devices 
providing a convenient description of special distributions of charge and current 
in special types of materials. This may be called the principle of Ampere and 
Lorentz1. Thus, if we anticipate a treatment of surfaces of discontinuity in the 
polarization and magnetization, we must first introduce surface distributions 
of charge and current into the conservation law of charge. For mathematical 
simplicity, at the outset we did not burden the reader with this additional complication. The fundamental physical idea remains the same, conservation of 
charge, but now we give a slightly more general mathematical expression for 
the measure of charge. The mathematician will readily infer a general mathematical statement for the physical idea of conservation in terms of additive 
set functions. 
ß) Surface distributions of charge and current. Let E (a:) = 0 be the equation 
of a 3-dimensional surface in space-time representing the history of a 2-dimensional 
surface in space bearing a surface distribution of charge and current. We now 
replace (270.1) by the more general assumption that the charge is expressiblein 
the form 
a: [ Ya. QJ = J (J. dYa + J w . d~*' (283.1) 
.9',n 2' 
where (J is the volume density of charge-current and the world contravariant 2-vector density w is the surface density of charge-current. The field w is defined 
only at events corresponding to the surface E (~) = 0. In (283 .1), ~ n E denotes 
the intersection of the arbitrary 3-dimensional surface ~ and the special3-dimensional surface E(~) =0. Here we have assumed that, if the intersection is not 
empty, Ya n E is a 2-dimensional surface and d~* is its differential element. 
Generalizing (270.5). we now write the law of conservation of charge in the 
form 
~ (J • d~ + J w . d~* = 0. (283.2) 
1 WHITTAKER [1951. 39, p. 88, PP· 393-400] 
684 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 283. 
We know that, for all surfaces .9':; not intersecting E=O, as a consequence 
of (283 .2) there exist potential fields 117'" such that 
f6·d.9':i=-~11'f'""d~. (283-3) 
W e can also construct fields 11.'7' such that 
~ 11.'/'" d~ = 0 
for every circuit not intersecting E(a:) =0, and suchthat 
~ 11.'/'. d~ = - J w . d~* 
(283.4} 
(283.5) 
for every circuit intersecting E = 0. Therefore, we can write the charge-current 
potential equation in the form 
J (J. d.9':; + J w. d~* =- ~ 11" d~. (283.6) 
Y',n.z: 
where 11 =w-+11.'7'· Eq. (283.6) generalizes (271.1). If the fields are continuously 
differentiable except perhaps at E (:~:) = 0, at every event not on E (:~:) = 0 we 
have 
6 = div 11· (283.7) 
Howcver, at E(a:) =0, the potential11 must have a discontinuity consistent with 
the condition 
or, in component form 
[11] ·gradE= -w·gradE, 
[1JDLI] oLlE=- wDLI oLlE. 
(283.8) 
(283.9) 
The aether relations (280.4) or (280.6) are postulated to hold between the 
electromagnetic field p and the generalized potential 11 of (283.6). Thus, the 
electromagnetic field is discontinuous at a surface bearing a distribution of charge 
and current. 
The 3-dimensional form of the law of conservation of charge and the charge 
and current equations taking into account a surface distribution of charge and 
current can be obtained from the world invariant equations (283.2) and (283.6) 
by introducing a Euclidean frame. The resulting equations have an interesting 
but complicated structure. Since we do not make use of these equations here, 
we leave to the reader the task of deriving them. 
Having established these preliminary results on surface distributions of 
charge and current, we are in a position to give a fairly general treatment of 
polarization and magnetization in moving and deforming material media, allowing that these fields may be discontinuous at special surfaces. 
y) Polarization charge and current and magnetization current. As an introduction to the more difficult dynamical case, we note first some simpler and better 
known results of the static theory of dielectrics and magnets. These latter 
theories are concerned with the determination of the electric and magnetic fields 
in regions of space containing dielectric and magnetic materials at rest. 
It is customary in the electrostatic theory of dielectrics to divide the charge 
distribution into two types: ( 1) the bound charge or polarization charge; (2) the 
free charge1• The polarization charge contained in a 3-dimensional spatial region v 
is given by 
[[v, QJ =-p P · dd (283.10) 
1 The polarization charge is also called the "induced" charge, and the free charge is 
also called the "real" or "true" charge. See, for example, STRATTON [1941, 8, Sec.t. 3.13, 
p. 183]. 
Sect. 283. Polarization and magnetization. 685 
where 6 is the complete boundary of v and P is the density of polarization. One 
generally considers problems where P is a continuously differentiable field 
except at special surfaces where it suffers a jump or discontinuity. Excepting 
points on these surfaces, we can use the integral theorem to transform the surface 
integral (283.10) to a volume integral. Thus, if v is a region in which the polarization field is everywhere continuously differentiable, we have 
C\:[v,QJ =- JdivPdv. (283.11) 
The scalar field - div P may be called the volume density of polarization charge. 
If the region v is divided into two regions v+ and v- by a surface 6* across which P 
suffers a jump [P], and if P is continuously differentiable in the closure of the 
regions v+ and v-, we can write (283.10) in the form 
<r[v,QJ =- fdivPdv- f[P]·da*. (283.12) 
vnd• 
The differential element da* can be written in the form n da, where da is the 
element of area, and n is the unit normal to 6*. The scalar [P] · n thus plays 
the role of a surface density of charge. The fields - div P and [P] · n are called 
the Poisson-Kelvin equivalent charge distributions of a polarized medium1• 
Consider next the case when the polarization P depends upon the time. The 
time rate of change of the polarization charge contained in a stationary region v 
is given by 
a ~ oP --<r[v QJ =- --·da at ' ot (283 .13) 
provided the polarization field be sufficiently smooth as to allow interchanging 
the operations of integration and differentiation. Thus, in this simple case, it 
is reasonable to call oPjot the current of polarization. In the more general case 
when the region v is moving with the particles of a motion, we have 
!_<r[v QJ =-,h dcP ·da 
dt ' 'j' dt . (283.14) 
Thus, by analogy with (275.3), the convected time flux dcPfdt will be called the 
polarization cttrrent relative to the particles of the motion. 
In the case of magnetic materials, it is known 2 that the magnetic field of a 
stationary magnet characterized by a magnetization field M is equivalent to 
the magnetic field of a volume distribution of magnetization current Jm and 
a surface distribution of magnetization current Km on surfaces of discontinuity 
of the field M such that 
J Jm·da+ J Kjill· dx* = pM· dx (283.15) 6 6n6• e 
where c is the complete boundary of 6 and c* is the curve of intersection of the 
surface of discontinuity 6* and 6. Thus we have 
Jm = curl M, Km = [ M] . (283 .16) 
The differential element dx* can be written in the form dx*=Tds, where ds 
is the differential element of length along the CUrVe 6 n 6* and T is the unit tangent 
vector to this curve. Let n denote the unit normal to the surface of discontinuity 
1 SM!TH-WHITE [1951, 24]. 2 STRATTON [1941, 8, Sect. 4.10, p. 242]. 
686 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 283. 
d* (see Fig. 47). We can then introduce the unit vector m through the relation 
T=nxm and write the line integral over c* in (283.15) in the alternative form 
f K~·daJ*= f K~·mds, (283.17) 
d(ld• d(ld. 
where 
.K~ = K~xn = [M] xn. (283.18) 
The surface density of magnetization current is usually defined as the vector 
field .K~ rather than the field K~. The fields curl M and [M] or [M] xn may 
be called the equivalent Amperian currents of magnetized matter. 
Eq. (274.5) states that the current J is, 
in the general case, the sum of the conduction current ~ relative to the particles of a 
motion and the "convection current" Qv. 
J=~+Qv. (283.19) 
Now we have seen that a polarized material 
medium has an equivalent volume distribution of charge - div P, and we have 
seen that the convected time flux of the 
polarization field dcPfdt is analogous to 
the conduction current. We are thus led 
to define the current of polarization in a 
moving medium by 
Fig. 4 7. Geometry of a surface of discontinuity in the J. dc P d • p (28 ) magnetization. \13 = ----;Jt- IV V. 3.20 
We shall call the term -div Pv, the current of dielectric convection1 • If we 
expand the convected time-flux using the definitions (277.10) to (277.11) we get 
dP J\ll=ae +curl(P xv). (283.21) 
In the general case of a polarized and magnetized moving material medium 
in which there is a distribution of free charge Q'iJ and free current, J'iJ, the resultant 
or total volume density of charge and current J and Q is given by 
Q = Q'iJ- div P, } 
J= J'ij+~jF- divPv +curlM. (283.22) 
If we substitute these expressions for Q and J into the charge and current equations (278.4} and (278.5), we obtain LoRENTz's form of these equations for moving 
polarized and magnetized material media 2• 
~) W orld tensor representation of polarization and magnetization charge-current. 
Consider the world contravariant 2-vector density 3r whose components in a 
Euclidean frame are given by 
3r= (dualM + dual(Pxv),- P). (283.23) 
1 According to WHITTAKER [1951, 39, p. 398], the term curl P X v is called the current 
of dielectric convection. We prefer the arrangement of terms and definitions used here because 
the analogous terms in (283.19) and (283.20) have similar transformation properties, while 
the analogous terms in (283.19) and (283.21) do not. 
Z WHITTAKER [1951, 39, p. 398]. 
Sect. 283. Polarization and magnetization. 687 
The components of the natural divergence of :r: in a Euclidean frame are given by 
tJ~ = div :r: = (J\ll + JID!,- div P). (283.24) 
The world vector density (J!B may be called the volume density of bound chargecurrent. The distribution of charge and current represented by (J~ describes 
the effects of polarization and magnetization in the moving medium. An invariant decomposition of the magnetization-polarization world tensor :r: is obtained 
by introducing the world polarization and magnetization densities defined in terms 
of :r: by 
~D = n_D,Jt,j, } 
i!RD ,J = n;Lf D _ 2 ~[D vLil, (283.25) 
One sees that' and IDl are space tensors, so that their vanishing in one Euclidean 
frame implies their vanishing in every Euclidean frame. From the definitions 
{283.23) to {283.25), we have 
:rr = IDl + dual ' X v 
IDl = (dualM, 0), '= (P, 0). 
{283.26) 
(283.27) 
If :rr is discontinuous across a surface .E(x) =0 in space-time, we introduce 
a surface distribution of bound charge-current represented by a world contravariant 2-vector density w~ such that 
(!)~ = - [:r]. {283.28) 
From (283.24) and (283.28) we get 
[!8 [~, QJ = J (J~d~ + J (!)58. d~* = ~ :rr. d~. {283.29) 
7,n:I: 
Comparing this equation with {283.6), we see that the polarization-magnetization 
field :r: is a potential of a conservative distribution of bound charge. If we assume 
that the free charge is representable in the form 
<r1J[~,QJ =ftJ1J·d9'a, (283.30) 
we get for the resultant charge 
[ [ ~' QJ = [~ [ ~' QJ + [1J [ ~' QJ } 
= J (tJ\J + tJ!D) · d~ + J w~ · d~* =- ~"'. d~, (283-31) 
where the resultant potential "' is assumed to be related to the electromagnetic 
field by the fundamental aether relations {280.6). Substituting (283.29) in 
{283.31) we get the result 
[p[9'a,QJ =ftJp·d~=-~T·d~, {283.32) 
where 
T="'- :r: = (dual(H- M- Pxv), D + P). (283-33) 
To state this result in words, we can say that, in polarizable and magnetizable 
media, there exists a world potential r for that portion of the charge and current 
distribution which has been characterized as free. Let us introduce the special 
notation 
T= (dual~,~) (283-34) 
for the components of r in a Euclidean frame. According to (283.33) ~ and ~ are 
given by 
~=H-M-Pxv,} 
~=D+P. {283·3 5) 
688 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The C!assical Field Theories. Sect. 283. 
It is important that we distinguish between the fields (D, H) and (~. ~) in 
polarizable and magnetizable materials. The characteristic feature of the resultant potentials D and H not shared by the partial potentials ~ and ~ is that 
they are related to the electric field E and the magnetic flux density B by the 
simple aether relations (279.1) even in the interior of dielectrics and magnetic 
materials in motion. In theories of dielectric and magnetic materials, it is customary to prescribe a constitutive relation between the polarization and magnetization fields and the electromagnetic field. This constitutive relation may be as 
general as a functional relationship where the polarization and magnetization 
at a given instant depend on the history of the electromagnetic field experienced 
by the polarized and magnetized particle plus other variables such as strain 
and temperature which describe the state of the material medium. Thus we see 
that the relationship between the partial potentials ~ and ~ and the electromagnetic field may be quite complicated and is not the same in all materials 
and for all motions. If we regard the charge-current distribution as prescribed, 
the aether relations have the effect of imposing certain additional conditions 
on the electromagnetic field other than the law of conservation of magnetic flux. 
In a polarized and magnetized material medium, these additional conditions 
are to be obtained by substituting e0E for D and __!___ B for Hin (283.32). We 
are not to substitute e0E and __!___ B for the partia'l0
potentials ~ and ~· If the 
fto 
material medium is at rest in a Euclidean frame which is simultaneously a 
Lorentz frame, and if the constitutive relation for the polarization and magnetization is of the extremely simple type 
M=O, (283.36) 
where X is a constant, we have the relations 
~= e0 KE, ~=;oB, (283.37) 
where K = 1 +X· A material characterized by these simple constitutive relations 
may be called a non-magnetic, linear, isotropic, rigid dielectric. If this same 
material is set in motion with respect to the reference frame for which the aether 
relations are valid, the constitutive relations (283. 36) are replaced by 
(283.38) 
Note that for a moving medium of this simple type, the relations between the 
partial potentials ~ and ~ are rather complicated. We have 
~ = e0 ( K E + X v X B) , ) 
~ = ;J B + ~ v X (E + v X B)) . (283.39) 
The point emphasized by LoRENTZ in his electron theory is that the aether 
relations between the resultant potentials D and H and the electric field E 
and magnetic flux density B are unaffected by the presence of electrons or their 
motion, but it is clear that the simple linear relations (283.37) between ~. ~. E 
and B fail to hold in a moving medium of this type1• Finally, we caution the 
reader regarding notation. In most elementary and even advanced texts on 
1 The constitutive relations (283.38) for the moving medium of this simple type will 
be discussed further in Sect. 308, where we shall also consider their relativistic or Lorentz 
invariant generalization. 
Sect. 284. Electromagnetic energy, momentum, stress, and energy flux. 689 
electromagnetic theory, a clear distinction is not made between the partial 
potentials ~ and ~ and the resultant potentials D and H in discussion of 
polarizable and magnetizable media. However, it is only when one attempts to 
treat the problern of dielectrics and magnets set in motion that serious difficulties 
arise from confusing these fields. 
The world tensor form of the field equations and boundary conditions following from (283.32) is 
div T= a\J, 
[TJ·gradL'=O, 
(283.40) 
(283.41) 
where (283.41) must hold at an arbitrary surface .E(aJ) =0 provided we exclude 
surface distributions of free charge and current. 
If we refer all quantities to a Euclidean frame which is simultaneously a 
Lorentz frame, these equations take the 3-dimensional tensor form 
Q\j- div P = e0 div E, 
J." + curl M- div Pv + !:_dcP = ~ curl B- e0 °"E , " t p.0 ut 
[e0E +P] ·n = 0, 
nx [;0 B-M-Pxv] +un[e0E+P]=O, 
(283.42) 
(283.43) 
(283.44) 
(283.45) 
where n is the unit normal and un is the speed of the moving surface of discontinuity. 
IV. Conservation of energy and momentum. 
284. Electromagnetic energy, momentum, stress, and energy flux. If the polarization and magnetization vanish, there is general agreement that the density 
of electromagnetic energy [fe and the density of electromagnetic momentum ' are 
to be defined as follows: 
Ue=D·E+B·H, 
'=DXB. 
(284.1) 
(284.2) 
We assume that the reference frame is one for which we have the aether relations 
(279.1) so that, 
1 U =e E2+-B2 e 0 P.o • 
'=e0EXB, 
(284.3) 
(284.4) 
expressing the energy and momentum in terms of the electromagnetic field. In 
any case, independently of any hypothesis regarding polarization and magnetization, from these definitions and from the field equations (278.1) through (278.7) 
we derive the following identities: 
:tJffedv+~(ExH)·da=- J J·Edv, (284.5) 
:tJ$,dv-~m",dak=- jCQE,+(JxB),]dv, (284.6} 
where m", is the electromagnetic stress tensor, 
m", = Dk E, + B" H, - t !5~ (D · E + B · H). (284.7} 
Handbuch der Pbysik, Bd. III/1. 44 
690 Co TRUESDELL and Ro TouPIN: The Classical Field Theorieso Secto 2840 
We record the caution that proof of the identities (284o5) and (28406) depends in 
an essential way on the aether relations D = s0E and H = __!___ Bo 
Po 
These identities have the form of equations of balance (Secto 157)0 The scalar 
field -J o E is the supply of electromagnetic energyo Alternatively, + J o E 
may be regarded as the rate at which electromagnetic energy is converted into 
other forms of energy; while our development in this chapter has so far been 
purely electromagnetic, we expect such other forms of energy to include kinetic 
energy and internal energy. Similarly, the vector field QE + JxB, called the 
Lorentz force, represents the rate at which electromagnetic momentum is transformed into mechanical momentum. The vector EX H, called the Poynting 
vector, is the influx of electromagnetic energy. The electromagnetic stress tensor 
is the efflux of electromagnetic momentum; moreover, it is symmetrici: 
(284.8) 
The formalanddimensional analogy between the identities (284.5) and (284.6) 
and the principles of balance of energy and linear momentum in continuum 
mechanics is immediate. However, the results here are identities, formal consequences of the conservation laws and the aether relations of electromagnetism, while the corresponding principles in mechanics are postulates. This difference and this similarity provide the motive for the connection between mechanics and electromagnetism that is the subject of the rest of this chapter. 
Other definitions of electromagnetic momentum, energy, stress, and energy f!ux are 
sometimes made in the case of po!arized and magnetized material mediao For example, if 
the electromagnetic energy density Ue is defined as a solution of the equation 
oUe _ ~-E oB Oe.. 
at - at + at ~· (284.9) 
where the fields"!ll and ,t) are the partial potentials of the free charge and current as defined 
in Secto 283, we obtain an identity of the form 
(284.10) 
where J~ is the density of free currento Similarly, suppose one retains the definition of 
electromagnetic momentum (284.2), but defines electromagnetic stress to be 
m's == :4)' E5 + B' H 5 - t !5~ (!ll· E + B · H); (284.11) 
we shall then have an identity of the form 
The antisymmetric part of the stress tensor m'k• given by 
m['kl = p[r E%], 
represents a torque exerted by the electric field on the polarized matter. 
(284.12) 
(284.13) 
Still other definitions have been proposed. The problern of what electromagnetic quantities are to be identified or related to the essentially mechanical 
concepts of stress, energy, momentum, and energy flux in polarized and magne1 Recall that our reference frame is reetangular Cartesian and that Cartesian covariant 
and contravariant indices are equivalent, so that (284.8) is an invariant condition under the 
group of orthogonal transformations. The indices of Cartesian tensors are usually written 
all as subscripts orallas superscripts; however, the position of the indices we use here follows 
quite naturally from the way these Cartesian tensors are related to world tensors and is 
a more suggestive scheme of notation. 
Sect. 285. Mechanical energy, momentum, stress, and energy flux. 691 
tized material media, the subject of extensive debate for more than half a century, 
is reviewed by PAULI1 . As we shall attempt to show here, this problern is not 
one to be solved independently of consideration of the properties of the material 
medium. Neither are we to regard identities such as (284.5), (284.6), (284.10), 
and (284.12) as conservation laws. These equations place no new restrictions on 
the electromagnetic and charge-current fields but are satisfied identically as 
consequences of the aether relations and the laws of conservation of charge and 
magnetic flux. Conservation of energy and momentum are conditions placed 
on the total energy and momentum of all types: mechanical, caloric, electromagnetic and any other forms of energy and momentum one may choose to define. 
G. GYORGYI 2 has recently demonstrated the equivalence of various definitions of 
the electromagnetic stress, energy, momentum, and energy flux provided the 
mechanical counterparts of these quantities be suitably adjusted. Additional and 
special assumptions classifying or dissecting momentum, energy, stress, etc., into 
various types are necessary in the formulation of constitutive relations but in no 
way affect what weshall call the conservation laws of energy and momentum. 
The following treatment aims primarily to formulate the conservation laws of energy 
and momentum independently of any resolution of stress, energy, momentum, and 
energy flux. Continuing the program initiated in Sect. 270, we give to the laws 
of conservation of energy and momentum a statement also independent of 
any geometry of space-time. Such a general statement once obtained, the 
resulting equations expressing conservation of energy and momentum are susceptible to the introduction of Galilean, Lorentzian, or other space-time geometry 
and to such resolution of the energy, momentum, stress, and energy flux as 
may be appropriate for the formulation of special constitutive relations appropriate to various materials. Rather than beginning with an abstract postulational 
approach as we did in treating conservation of charge and magnetic flux and 
then proceeding to obtain more familiar results by adding restrictive assumptions 
and a space-time geometry, here we shall begirr with equations and concepts 
familiar from a traditional point of view and proceed thence to the more abstract and general conclusions. 
285. Mechanical energy, momentum, stress, and energy flux. Let b, derrote 
the density of mechanical momentum, t's the mechanical stress, um the density 
of mechanical energy and h' the heat flux or extra flux of energy 3 • 
The equations of balance of mechanical momentum and energy may be written 
in the form d J J- { dt b,dv =':t'ts,das+. ef,dv, (285.1) 
r f/' r 
:~ .f um dv- ~ (t'szs + h') da,= .r (q + e t,z') dv, (285.2) 
r f/' r 
where fis a spatial region moving with the particles of the motion and Y'is its 
boundary. Cf. (200.1) and (241.1). The extrinsic forcefis the supply of mechani1 [1920, 3]. 
2 [1955. 11]. 3 The density of mechanical momentum b in classical mechanics is assumed proportional 
to the velocity field z, b = ez, where e is the mass densify. Also, in classical mechanics, the 
density of mechanical energy Um is given by Um= e (e + t z2), where e is the internal energy 
per unit of mass and t z2 is the kinetic energy per unit of mass. Cf., however, Sect. 238. 
We assume that the 3-dimensional tensors occurring in these definitions are Cartesian 
tensors under time-independent transformations of the spatial co-ordinates. Thus the vertical 
placement of the indices does not represent any difference of transformation law. Our choices 
for these positions anticipate a subsequent world tensor representation. 
44* 
692 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 286. 
cal momentum. The quantity q + f · z is the supply of mechanical energy; it 
consists of two parts, the latter, f · z, being the rate of working of the extrinsic 
force and the former, q, the supply of internal energy. If we write (285.1) 
and (285.2) in terms of regions and surfaces stationary with respect to the reference frame we get 
:t fb,dv- 9' (t 5,-b,z 5) das= f ef,dv, (285.3) 
:t f Um dv- p(ts,zr + h"- Umzs) das= f (q+ e f,z') dv. (285.4) 
The terms b, zs and Um zs appearing in the surface integrals of this latter form 
of the equations of balance are called the convective flux of momentum and energy, 
respectively. 
In classical mechanics, we also have the equation of balance of the moment 
of momentum or angular momentum. For regions of integration moving with 
the particles of a motion, this equation takes the form 
(285.5) 
where the assigned couples l'5 may be interpreted as the rate of supply of mechanical angular momentum in excess of the torque exerted by the assigned 
force. The couple stress mk's may be interpreted as a flux of mechanical angular 
momentum in excess of the torque exerted by the mechanical stress. Cf. (200.1h. 
286. The interaction of matter and the electromagnetic field. Here we consider 
only materials for which the couple stress mk's vanishes, and we neglect all supplies of mechanical momentum and internal energy other than those arising 
from the interaction of the material with an electromagnetic field. In particular, 
we neglect the interaction of the material with a gravitational field. 
A law of interaction of matter with the electromagnetic field is prescribed by 
assuming particular forms for the fields f, q, and l as functions or fundionals 
of the electromagnetic variables. As preliminaries to the general treatment in 
the next section, we consider two special laws. First, suppose 
ef=QE+JxB, 
q=il·i, 
l =0. 
These definitions for f and q imply the identity 
q + ef·v =J·E. 
(286.1) 
(286.2) 
(286.3) 
(286.4) 
Substituting the expressions (286.1) through (286.4) into the mechanical equations 
of balance (285.1), (285.2), and (285.4) and eliminating the charge and current 
fields by means of the identities (284. 5) and (284.6), we get the equations 
:t J [b, + (DxB),] dv-p [tk, + mk, + (D xB),zk] dak = o, (286.5) 
:t J (Um+ Ue) dv- p[tk,v'+hk- (ExH)k+ Umzk]dak=O, (286.6) 
:,J [zlkb,1+zlk(DxB,1] dv-p [zlkt",1+zlkm",1+zlk(DxB),1z"] da,.= o. (286.7) 
Sect. 286. The interaction of matter and the electromagnetic field. 
As a second example, set 
e /, = pk 8k E, + (JxB), + QrsE,, 
q=~·~. 
lk, = plkE,1. 
693 
(286.8) 
(286.9) 
(286.10) 
Substituting these expressions into the mechanical equations of balance 
(285.1), (285.2), and (285.4) and eliminating the charge and current by means 
of the identities (284.8) and (284.10), we obtain 
:t J [b,+ (DxB),] dv- ~ [tk,+mk,+(DxB),zk] dak = o, (286.11) 
:{ f (Um+ Ue) dv- ~ [tk,z' + hk- (ExH)k +Um zk] dak = 0, (286.12) 
:eJ [zfkbrl +zrk (D x B),1] dv- ~ [zlkt",1 +zlkm",1+z[k (D xB),1z"] da,. =0, (286.13) 
where mk, is given by (284.11). 
The assumptions (286.1) to (286. 3) and (286.8) to (286.1 0) embody different 
laws of interaction, examples illustrative of special theories of matter interacting 
with an electromagnetic field. The system of equations consisting in the conservation laws of charge and magnetic flux, the aether relations, and the equations 
of balance of energy and momentum is an underdetermined system. In any 
particular theory of materials, there are relations connecting the mechanical 
stress t and the energy flux h to the motion and to other variables characterizing 
the state of the medium. Now it is clear that for a given material, these relations 
cannot all be the same if the systems (286. 5) to (286.7) and (286.11) to (286.13) 
are to be equivalent. For example, if momentum is balanced, (286.7) implies 
that 
(286.14) 
whereas, (286.13) implies that 
(286.15) 
Thus, in the first case, the mechanical stress is symmetric since m is symmetric. 
In the second case, the mechanical stress is asymmetric, in general, since the 
electromagnetic stress m has an antisymmetric part given by (284.3). If it is 
assumed that the mechanical stress is a function of the local state of the material, 
as for example in elasticity theory, the functional dependence must be consistent 
with (286.14) or (286.15) depending on our choice for the law of interaction. 
However, both of these special models lead to results having a property in common. Indeed, since (285.1) and (285.2) are equations of balance, substitution 
of special forms for the supplies f, q, and l will of course yield results again having 
the form of equations of balance. What is important here is that in both cases 
use of the conservation laws of electromagnetism, through the agency of their 
corollaries (284.5) and (284.6), has led to equations of balance in which the volume 
integral is missing, i.e., the supplies are zero. That is, both cases lead to local 
conservation laws (Sect. 157). Conversely, but always subject to the assumed 
electromagnetic equations, these local conservation laws are equivalent to the 
balance of momentum, moment of momentum, and energy. These results suggest then that there is a generat formulation of the principles of Sect. 285 in 
the form of local conservation laws, and this we seek. 
694 C. TRuESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 287. 
The complexity ofthe Eqs. (286.5) to (286.7) and (286.11) to (286.13) is due in 
part to special assumptions regarding the resolution of energy, momentum, stress, 
and energy flux into various types. The mechanical momentum and internal energy 
and the electromagnetic momentum and energy are not separately conserved but are 
transformable into one another. The rate at which this transformation takes 
place for a given material is specified by the law of interaction of the matter 
with the electromagnetic field, characteristic of that material. Conservation of 
energy and momentum surely are laws of nature holding independently of the 
rates at which energy and momentum are converted from one form to another. 
Our principal objective in Subchapter li was to put the conservation laws of 
electromagnetic theory into a form as pure and devoid of extraneous and special 
assumptions as possible without losing contact with familiar concepts and 
mathematics. The review of familiar ideas and equations given in this section 
and the two foregoing should provide sufficient background and motivation for 
the following treatment of the laws of conservation of energy and momentum 
in a correspondingly pure form. 
287. Conservation of energy and momentum in a preferred inertial frame. The 
systems (286.5) to (286.7) and (286.11) to (286.13) each constitute a set of four 
equations having the general form 
p T,..D d ~D = o, D,f-l = 1, 2, 3, 4. (287.1) 
That is, each equation in each of these systems of four equations may be regarded 
as having been obtained from an equation of the form (287.1) with a fixed value 
of the index f-l if the quantities TfJD(z, t) are appropriately defined, subject to 
sufficient continuity of all the fields. For example, the energy equation (286.6) 
can be put in the form (287.1) with f-l =4 by integrating (286.6) with respect 
to the time between the limits ~ and t2 , and making the following definition 
of the quantities T4D: 
TP = Ws zs + h'- (EX H)'- um z', - um - Ue). (287.2) 
Similarly, the three momentum equations (286.5) can be written in the form 
(287.1) by setting 
T,.D = (- t'k- m'k + bkz', bk + (DXBh). (287.3) 
In the case of (286.11) we must set 
T,.D = (- t'k- m'k + bkz', bk + (DxBh). (287.4) 
In either case, assuming that the momentum equations are satisfied, the angular 
momentum equations are equivalent to the conditions 
Tl•k] = 0, (287.5) 
provided the mechanical momentum bis parallel to z as is assumed in classical 
mechanics. 
That is, we have observed that in all theories of electromagnetodynamics of 
continuous media equations of the form (287.1) and (287.5), with TfJD suitably 
identified, are valid and are equivalent to the principles of linear momentum 
and energy and to the principle of moment of momentum, respectively. In 
these theories, then, we may replace the more familiar mechanical principles of 
Sect. 285 by the conservation law (287.1) and the symmetry condition (287.5). 
Thus we are led to assume, independently of any resolution of momentum, 
energy, stress, and energy flux into various types and independently of any law 
of interaction between matter and the electromagnetic field, the existence of 
Sect. 288. World invariant form of the law of conservation of energy and momentum. 695 
a stress-energy-momentum tensor ~n satisfying (287.1) and (287.5). To these 
equations we have been led through an electromagnetic context. They are not 
to be regarded, however, as being restricted to electrodynamical phenomena. 
Rather, they encompass and extend the principles of continuum mechanics as 
explained in Subchapters DII and EI. We shall call (287.1), in the special 
coordinates there employed, the law of conservation of energy and momentum; 
the symmetry condition (287.5), the law of conservation of angular momentum. 
The extent to which these principles may replace the usual principles of mechanics is 
not determined. In view of the principle of equivalence of surface and volume sources (Sect.15 7), 
it would seem that a formal reconciliation is always possible when the couple stress is zero, 
but such a reconciliation would sometimes involve redefinition of the mechanical stress tensor 
and in many cases would scarcely be natural or useful. In a fully general scheme, extending 
that embodied in (205.18), a non-zero right-hand side would have tobe supplied for (287.1), 
and (287.5) would be replaced by a system of tensor equations of the form (287.1) but 
involving tensors of increasingly high order. 
288. World invariant form of the law of conservation of energy and momentum. 
We have thus far simply introduced an array or matrix of sixteen quantities ~n 
satisfying (287.1) and (287.5). The coordinates z and t in these equations have 
a definite and special interpretation. They are the coordinates of a space-time 
frame for which the aether relations hold in the canonical form (279.1) and which 
is simultaneously an inertial frame from the point of view of classical mechanics. 
As was discussed in Sect. 279, any two frames so restricted must be related by 
a time-independentorthogonal transformation of the spatial co-ordinates. Under 
this group of transformations, the quantities T/ transform as a tensor of rank 2, 
the quantities Tf and 7; 4 transform as vectors, and the quantity Tl is a scalar. 
We wish to extend this transformation law to the full group of unrestricted analytic transformations of the four space-time Co-ordinates ~- We can retain a 
tensor law of transformation for the quantities r,_.n under this larger group of 
transformations without introducing auxiliary fields or special assumptions regarding the geometry of space-time provided we assume that ~n is a 2-event 
world tensor field with the transformation law1 
(288.1) 
under general analytic transformations of the co-ordinates and transformations 
A' = A-I A of the unit of action. A unit of action is related to the units of energy 
and time by A = ET. 
If the two events 1 and 2 are always referred to the same co-ordinate 
system, the transformation law of the 2-event tensor field Tunder any subgroup 
of linear transformations (e.g. Galilean or Lorentzian) of the co-ordinates is 
indistinguishable from the transformation law of an ordinary single-event mixed 
tensor field of rank 2 and weight 1. Hence, the extended law of transformation 
(288.1) for the quantities ~n under the group of general transformations of the 
co-ordinates is in agreement with the previously assigned transformation law 
of the quantities under the subgroup of time independent orthogonal transformations of the spatial co-ordinates. Moreover, our principal reason for assuming 
the transformation law (288.1) for the T: is that the integral equation 
~ ~n d~n = 0 (288.2) 
is a world tensor equation holding not only in the preferred inertial frames, but 
m an arbitrary space-time co-ordinate system. Before proceeding, we should 
l See Sect. App. 15 for a general discussion of double tensor fields. 
696 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 288. 
point out that the symmetry condition T['n = 0 holds only in the preferred inertial 
frames and is obviously is not a world tensor invariant condition. 
Wehave been led to assume a world tensor equation (288.2) and the transformation Iaw (288.1) for the quantities Tby a process of abstraction and extension 
of the classical equations and transformation Iaw. Clearly, such a process is not 
unique if ail that we demand is that Eq. (288.2) and the transformation law 
(288.1) reduce to the classical equation and transformation Iaw when the COordinates are specialized. We have chosen this extension of the classical transformation Iaw largely because of its simplicity and the fact that (288.2) is a 
world tensor equation not involving special assumptions regarding the geometry 
of space-time. A more abstract formulation of the Iaw of conservation of energy 
and momentum can be obtained by first postulating equation (288.2) and the 
transformation law (288.1). Then, by introducing a number of special assumptions 
regarding the 2-event field T, the geometry of space-time, and the resolution 
of stress, energy, momentum, and energy flux into mechanical and electromagnetic components, we can derive the classical energy and momentum equations 
by a process of specialization and reduction. W e shall now outline briefly such a 
treatment of energy and momentum paralleling our treatment of charge and magnetic flux in Subchapter Il. 
We assign a world vector additive set function !l9 [ Ya, :x:, A] of energy and 
momentum to every Ya in space-time. The set function !l9 has the absolute 
dimension [ A] where A is the unit of action. The value of !l9 in a general system 
of co-ordinates may depend on the Co-ordinates of a reference event :x:. Weshall 
call !l9 the energy-momentum vector of the set Ya referred to the event :x:. The 
components of !l9 in a preferred inertial frame are denoted by 
(288.3) 
where ' is the resultant momentum of the set Ya and U is the total energy of the 
set Ya. I t follows from the rules given in Sect. 273 that 
phys. dim.' = [AL -1], 
phys. dim. U = [A r-lJ, 
(288.4) 
(288.5) 
in agreement with the customary relations between the units of action, length, 
time, momentum, and energy. 
Next we assume that !l9 is expressible in the form 
(288.6) 
where T is a 2-event world tensor field having the transformation law (288.1). 
We postulate the law of conservation of energy and momentum: the 
world vector m vanishes for every circuit, 
(288.7) 
We call T the stress-energy-momentum tensor. 
From the point of view of world geometry, a preferred inertial frame can be 
defined invariantly as a space-time co-ordinate system for which the Lorentz 
tensor y has the canonical form (280.2) and for which the classical space normalt 
has its canonical form t = (0, 0, 0, 1). We have interpreted such a reference 
frame as an inertial framein which the "aether" is at rest; these frames have 
intrinsic mechanical and electromagnetic significance. As a characteristic feature 
of the classical theory of energy and momentum we postulate that if the co-
Sect. 289. Conservation of angular momentum, special relativity. 697 
ordinates of aJ1 and aJ2 are referred to a common preferred inertial frame, the 
stress-energy-momentum-tensor T,..n (aJ1 , aJ2) is independent of the co-ordinates aJ2 • 
Thus, in such a frame, the components of the energy-momentum vector 
!!9 [SI:;, aJ2 , A] are independent of aJ2 and depend only on SI:; and the unit of 
action. Since 
~ !S[g;, aJ, AJ · dSfi = 0 (288.8) 
is a world tensor equation holding trivially in every preferred inertial frame, 
it is satisfied by the components of tm in a general system of Co-ordinates. 
The field equations and boundary conditions following from the law of conservation of energy and momentum are 
oaT/}=0, (288.9) 
[T/}] a!J ..r = o. (288.10) 
Substituting the special forms (287.2) and (287.3) for the T into (288.9), we 
find that these four equations are equivalent to the system 
ezk = o,t'k + Q Ek + (JxBh, (288.11) 
e i = t'k a, zk + ~ . Ci + div h, (288.12) 
where we have used the full complement of assumptions embodied in the conservation laws of charge and magnetic flux, the aether relations, and the continuity equation [cf. (156.5)]: 
~; + div(ez) = o. (288.13) 
The jump conditions (288.10) holding at a moving surface of discontinuity 
.E(aJ, t) =0 encompass as a special case and extend the jump conditions (205.3) 
and (241.5) to the case of electromagnetodynamical problems where discontinuities in the electromagnetic stress, energy, and momentum must also be 
considered. 
The ease with which the field equations and boundary conditions (288.9) 
and (288.10) follow from the world invariant form of the law of conservation 
of energy and momentum is perhaps the best recommendation for a 4-dimensional 
formalism as applied to classical mechanics. The world invariant formulation 
of the energy and momentum equations given in this section may be regarded 
simply as a mathematical device designed to illuminate the intrinsic structure 
of the classical equations and to calculate explicitly their form in an arbitrary 
coordinate system. Such a procedure in no way alters or impairs their essential 
physical and mathematical content but suggests generalizations of classical 
procedure and allows an easier comparison of the classical and relativistic theories. 
289. Conservation of angular momentum, special relativity, and the principle 
of equivalence of momentum and energy flux. In Sect. 287 we have seen that 
the classical law of conservation of angular momentum is embodied in the 
equations 
(289.1) 
where, from the point of view of world tensors, the Tk, are nine of the components 
of the stress-energy-momentum tensor T referred to an inertial frame in which 
the aether is at rest. Now consider the world tensor 
(289.2) 
698 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 290. 
In a preferred inertial frame we have 
Tlkr] = 0. (289.3) 
However, in classical mechanics, the momentum density and the energy flux 
are so constituted that we do not generally have 
This equation is equivalent to the statement that 
momentum density = -1
2- energy flux. c 
(289.4) 
(289.5) 
If, on the other hand, in the classical theory based on the resolutions (287.2) and 
(287.3), we assume that the mechanical momentum, energy, heat flux, and 
stress vanish, (289.4) reduces to the equation 
DxB =-1
-ExH (289.6) cZ ' 
which is satisfied by virtue of the aether relations. That is, electromagnetic 
momentum is defined as electromagnetic energy flux divided by the fundamental 
constant c2• In special relativity theory, there is an equivalence between momentum and energy flux and between mass and energy. The classical relation (289.6) 
between electromagnetic momentum and electromagnetic energy flux is extended 
to all forms of momentum and energy flux. Momentum in special relativity theory 
is defined 1 as energy flux divided by c2• The constitutive equations and definitions of mechanics are revised so as to be Lorentz invariant. Thus, in special 
relativity theory, we have the symmetry conditions 
Tll'•l=O, (289.7) 
holding in every Lorentz frame. The symmetry of a single-point tensor field is 
invariant under transformations of the co-ordinates. The Lorentz transformations are a linear subgroup of the group of general transformations of the spacetime co-ordinates. Under this group of linear transformations, our 2-event stressenergy-momentum tensor has a transformation law indistinguishable from the 
single-event tensor law of transformation assumed in relativity theory. Hence, 
the symmetry condition {289.7) is a Lorentz invariant condition. Interpreted 
from the point of view of classical mechanics, the symmetry condition (289.7) 
of relativity mechanics embodies the notion of conservation of angular momentum 
and the equivalence of momentum and energy flux. 
290. The dimensions of energy and momentum. The absolute dimension of 
the field T has been called the dimension of action. 
abs. dim. T = [A]. {290.1) 
The physical dimensions of stress, energy, momentum, and energy flux are 
determined by the following rule. Refer the co-ordinates of both events on 
which T depends to a common preferred inertial frame based on a unit of length L 
and a unit of time T. The components of T reduce to functions of a single event 
in such a frame and transform as Cartesian tensors under the group of transformations relating any pair of such frames. If we· transform the co-ordinates 
1 WHITTAKER [1951, 39, Vol. Il, p. 54], PLANCK [1908, 6]. This unified definition of 
momentum was PLANCK's method of expressing the relativistic equivalence of mass and 
energy. 
Sect. 291. Conclusions. 699 
and the units of length, time, and action simultaneously, we obtain from (288.1) 
T{ = L - 3 A T-1 A'', A \, T{, 
T{ = L -2 A A'' r Tf, 
T,f=L- 4 AA',,T/, 
Tl' = L - 3 A r-1 T4
4 • 
(290.2) 
(290.3) 
(290.4) 
(290.5) 
It is customary to introduce the unit of mass as an independent unit instead of 
the unit of action. In terms of the unit of mass, the physical dimensions of stress, 
momentum, energy flux, and energy density as determined by the foregoing 
transformation formulae can be obtain by substituting 
[AJ = [M L2J-1]. (290.6) 
Also, it is not customary to regard the units of action, charge, and magnetic 
flux as independent but to relate them according to 
A=Q<l>. (290.7) 
Thus, for example, transformations of the unit of magnetic flux are generally 
regarded as fixed in terms of the transformations of M, L, T, and Q by the relation 
(290.8) 
This is consistent with our having called DxB a momentum density and 
Ex H a flux of energy without introducing any additional dimensional constants 
of proportionality. Thus we have 
phys. dim. D X B = [M L - 2 y-1], 
phys. dim. EX H = [M T- 3], 
(290.9) 
(290.10) 
in agreement with the customary dimensions of momentum per unit volume, 
and energy per unit area per unit time. 
291. Conclusions. The principal result contained in this chapter is a world 
tensor invariant formulation of the laws of conservation of charge, magnetic 
flux, energy, and momentum, independent of special assumptions as to the geometry of space-time. 
In Subchapter IV, we motivated the law of conservation of energy and momentum by considering the classical energy and momentum equations of a continuous 
medium interacting with an electromagnetic field. We assumed that the stressenergy-momentum tensor T/} was a 2-event world tensor field. While the chargecurrent potential and the electromagnetic field are connected through the aether 
relations, no general relation between the stress-energy-momentum tensor and 
the other fields has been proposed here. The basic content of Subchapter IV 
is thus independent of the two preceding. Rather, the conservation law of energy 
and momentum as formulated here is to be regarded as encompassing and 
generalizing the purely mechanical considerations of Subchapters D II and E I; 
it also includes and extends the various purely electromagnetic proposals for 
conservation of energy and momentum. 
The conservation laws of charge, magnetic flux, momentum, energy and 
angular momentum constitute an underdetermined system of equations. They 
must be supplemented by relations between the conservative fields. The aether 
relations are an example of such relations. The many determinate special theories 
700 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The C!assical Field Theories. Sects. 292, 293· 
encompassed by the conservation laws is evidence of the different special ideas 
of material behavior consistent with them. The conservation laws provide a 
general framework common to all electrodynamic theories, classical and relativistic, with which we are familiar. Special and general relativity theory entail 
modification of our concepts of time, mass, energy, momentum, the aether relations, and inertial frames, but have yet to alter in principle· either the formal or 
the intuitive aspects of the laws of conservation of charge, magnetic flux, energy, 
and momentum. 
G. Constitutive Equations. 
I. Generalities. 
292. The nature of constitutive equations. In Sect. 7 we explained that the 
field equations and jump conditions express the general principles of mechanics, 
thermodynamics, and electromagnetism, while constitutive equations define 
ideal materials, which are mathematical models of particular classes of materials 
encountered in nature. The preceding treatise has developed in detail the properties of motions and of the fundamental physical principles of balance, which 
imply both field equations and jump conditions. 
In this final chapter we illuminate the concept of constitutive equation by 
stating general principles and adducing common examples. 
293. Principles to be used in forming constitutive equations. It should be 
needless to remark that while from the mathematical standpoint a constitutive 
equation is a postulate or a definition, the first guide is physical experience, 
perhaps fortified by experimental data. However, it is rarely if ever possible 
to determine all the basic equations of a theory by physical experience alone. 
Every theory abstracts and simplifies the natural phenomena it is intended to 
describe (cf. Sect. 4). Supposing that the theorist has assembled the facts of 
experience he wishes to use in defining an ideal material, we now list the mathematical principles he may call to his aid when he attempts to formulate definite 
constitutive equations. 
We know of no ideal material for which all these principles have been demonstrated to hold, although for the simpler classical theories it is generally believed 
that they do. 
rx) Consistency. Any constitutive equation must be consistent with the general 
principles of balance of mass, momentum, energy, charge, and magnetic flux. 
This is obvious and easy to say, but to test it in a special case may be difficult. 
ß) Co-ordinate invariance. Constitutive equations must be stated by a rule 
which holds equally in all inertial Co-ordinate systems, at any fixed time. Otherwise, a mere change of description would imply a differentresponsein the material. 
Such a rule may be achieved, usually trivially, by stating the equations either 
in tensorial form or by the aid of direct notations not employing co-ordinates 
at all1 . 
y) I sotropy or aeolotropy. Materials exhibiting no preferred directions of 
response are said to be isotropic. There are differences of opinion as to how 
this somewhat vague concept should be rendered mathematically precise. In 
the common phrase "isotropic material" we are unable to discem any meaning. 
Only after a kind of material has been defined by a particular constitutive equa1 However, the Iiterature of hydraulics abounds in "power laws" which are not invariant, 
as was pointed out by KLEITZ [1873, 4, § 22] in a work dating from 1856; the same may be 
said of rheology. 
Sect. 293. Principles to be used in forroing constitutive equations. 701 
tion does it become possible to state an unequivocal concept of isotropy. Pursuant 
to this idea, NoLL1 defines the isotropy group of a material as the group of transformations of the material coordinates which leave the constitutive equations 
invariant. The nature of this group specifies the symmetries of the material. 
A material is then isotropic if its isotropy group is the full orthogonal group. 
Various kinds of aeolotropy, which is a symmetry with respect to certain preferred 
directions, are shown by materials whose isotropy groups are proper subgroups 
of the orthogonal group, or are other groups. 
While these definitions reflect broader ideas, up to this time they have been 
rendered concrete only in pure mechanics, since the general constitutive equations 
expressing energetic and electromagnetic response are not yet known. In theories 
not limited to purely mechanical phenomena it is usual to define isotropy in 
respect to the variables A, B, C, ... entering a constitutive equation by requiring 
the functional dependence of A, B, C, ... to be isotropic in the mathematical 
sense. A material which is isotropic in respect to one property, e.g. stress 
and strain, need not be so in respect to another, e.g., electric displacement 
and electric field. There is a large current Iiterature 2 concerning means of expressing isotropy and aeolotropy, but there is no adequate survey of the fieldas yet. 
(J) Just setting. Constitutive equations connecting a given set of variables 
should be such that, when combined with all the principles of balance affecting 
these same variables, there should result a unique solution corresponding to 
appropriate initial and boundary data, and a solution that depends continuously 
on that data. This principle can rarely be used. With great mathematicallabor, 
it has been proved to hold only in the simplest classes of boundary-value problems 
in the simplest classical theories 3• At best, it shifts the problern to another domain, 
that of finding adequate initial and boundary conditions 4• 
e) Dimensional invariance. It is essential that included in each constitutive 
equation should be a full list of all the dimensionally independent moduli or 
material constants upon which the response of the material may depend. This 
requirement has often been neglected in recent work, although it is a commonly 
accepted principle of physics, known at least since GALILEo's day, that any fully 
stated physical result is dimensionally invariant. (It is tacitly understood that 
dimensionless moduli need not be listed, since they cannot be specified until 
a particular functional form is stated.) 
The use of dimensional invariance to classify constitutive equations and in 
some cases to exclude inappropriate terms was initiated by TRUESDELL 5• The 
tool used is the classical n-theorem, a precise statement and simple rigorous 
proof of which was recently given by BRAND 6• 
1 [1948, 8, §§ 19-20]. 2 The basic principles derive froro work of CAUCHY. Nuroerous articles on the subject 
have appeared in the Journal and Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 1952 to date. 3 The honored custoro of verifying that the nurober of equations equals the nurober of 
unknown functions seeros to bring corofort. 
' In roany cases the traditional setting is known to fail to lead to a unique solution. E.g., 
in buckling probleros the specification of the loads on the boundary is not sufficient to insure 
a unique solution. Such probleros roay nevertheless be regarded as weil set if we aroplify 
either the boundary conditions or the constitutive relations. E.g., in the case of buckling we 
roay include as a part of the constitutive equations the requireroent that the elastic energy 
shall be a roinirouro with respect to coropatible deforroations; a unique solution results. 
Still better, the solution for static buckling roay be regarded as the liroit of a uniquely soluble 
dynaroic problero. 5 [1947, 17] [1948, 32 and 33] [1949, 33 and 34] [1950, 32, §§ 7-8] [1951, 27, §§ 22, 25] 
[1952. 22] [1952, 21, 1 § 47, 62-65. 67-69. 74-75] [1955. 28, § 1]. 6 [1957. 1]. 
702 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN : The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 293. 
C) Material indiflerence. The most important and the most frequently used 
correct idea for formulating constitutive equations is that the response of a material 
is independent of the observer. In proposing the first of all constitutive equations 
for deformable materials, namely, the law of linear elasticity, HoOKE1 gave the 
first dim hint toward this principle in the suggestion that by carrying a spring 
scale to the bottom of a deep mine or to the top of a mountain, the change of 
gravity could be measured. A more striking example is furnished by use of a 
spring, attached to the center of a horizontal, uniformly rotating table, to measure 
the centrifugal force acting upon a terminal mass. The assumption implicit in 
these measurements is that the force exerted by the spring in response to a given 
elongation is independent of the observer, being the same to an observer moving 
with the table as to one standing upon the floor. 
Another example is furnished by FoURIER's law of heat conduction, to be 
discussed in Sect. 296 below. According to this law, the flow of heat is proportional to the temperature gradient. Since both of these quantities are independent 
of the motion of the observer, in order that FOURIER's theory satisfy the principle 
of material indifference the constant of proportionality, or heat conductivity, 
must also be so invariant and hence is an absolute scalar under general transformations of space-time. 
This invariance or material indiffere:nce has nothing to do with the coordinate invariance described in Subsection ß, above. Indeed, if we conceive forces 
and motions directly, without the intermediary of co-ordinates and compon~nts, 
the requirement of material indifference is not thereby satisfied automatically 2• 
Neither can it be achieved by a thoughtless tour-dimensional formulation, for 
the precise meaning of "observer" in classical mechanics, where the time is a 
preferred co-ordinate, must 'be stated in terms of time-dependent orthogonal 
transformations, not of more general ones. 
That this requirement has a fundamental physical meaning is shown by the 
fact that the laws of motion themselves do not enfoy invariance with respect to the 
observer. "Apparent" forces and torques, in general, are needed to reconcile 
the descriptions of mechanical phenomena given by two observers in relative 
motion (Sect. 197). The principle of material indifference states that these are 
the only mechanical effects of the motion. For example, the deflection of the 
spring on the rotating table is supposed to be proportional to the entire force 
acting parallel to the spring, and thus, since the end is free, to measure precisely 
the force measurable by an observer at rest upon the table, this force being the 
"apparent" force that accompanies the rotation of the observer's frame with 
respect to one in which the spring would suffer no extension 3• 
All the classical linear theories, and some of the non-linear ones, satisfy the 
principle of material indifference trivially and automatically. For example, since 
mutual distances are invariant under change of observer, any theory in which 
the stress is determined only by mutual distances and differences or derivatives 
of mutual distances or relative velocities of particles exhibits material indifference. This is the case with most theories of elasticity and fluid motion 4 • 
1 [1678, 1]. 2 Cf. THIRRING [1929, 10, § 6]: "Es sei ausdrücklich darauf hingewiesen, daß Unabhängigkeit von der Koordinatenwahl durchaus nicht mit Unabhängigkeit vom Bezugssystem zu 
verwechseln ist." 3 If the spring is not idealized as massless, a simple correction is made for the centrifugal 
force acting upon the mass of the spring itself, but otherwise the response of the spring is 
unchanged. 
' It is important not to confuse material indifference with any kind of tensorial invariance. 
Some constitutive equations relate quantities which transform as tensors under change of 
Sect. 293. Principles to be used in forming constitutive equations. 703 
But as soon as time rates of stressing come into consideration, this invariance 
holds no longer. The problern was first faced and solved correctly, in a special 
case, by CAUCHY1 ; the idea was expressed more clearly and given a somewhat 
different form by ZAREMBA 2• While several recent studies have attacked the 
problern in one way or another, a general mathematical statement, for purely 
mechanical theories, was first achieved by NoLL3• Since this principle has not 
yet been formulated in a scope broad enough to cover all situations envisaged in 
this treatise, and since in the purely mechanical case it will be presented in the 
article, "The Non-linearField Theories of Mechanics" (Vol. VIII, Part2), we do not 
discuss it further here, though we give an example of its use in Sect. 298, below. 
rJ) Equipresence. In the most general physical situations, mass, motion, energy, 
and electromagnetism are simultaneously present. In the classical theories, the 
variables describing these phenomena are divided more or less arbitrarily into 
classes, the members of each of which are supposed to influence only each other, 
not the members of the other classes. Stress is coupled with strain or stretching, 
flux of energy with temperature gradient, electric displacement with electric field 
strength, magnetic intensity with magnetic induction. 
Such simple divisions of phenomena, perhaps lingering remnants of old views 
on "causes" and "effects ", suffice to describe a great range of physical experience, 
but, as is well known, the members of the different classes often react upon 
each other, and there are also various special theories of energetico-mechanical, 
electro-energetic, and electro-mechanical interactions. Here the process of the 
theorists has been conservative. They have maintained as much of the old 
separation of variables as possible, relinquishing just enough of it to include 
the bare existence of a particular phenomenon of interaction. 
In truth, the separation in itself is unnatural and unjustified by physical 
principle. Resulting only from the gradual discovery of individual phenomena, 
it reflects the old opinions that break physics up into compartments. The present 
treatise is conceived in the belief that the classical field theories, if rightly understood, describe most of the gross physical phenomena of nature. Constitutive 
equations, then, should not artificially divert these theories into disjoint channels. 
This same view, for energetico-mechanical effects alone, results also from 
statistical models of continuous matter. There, stress and flux of energy appear 
as gross or mean expressions of a purely mechanical process. The separation 
frame; e.g., the theories of fluids discussed in Sects. 298-299 relate t to d, both of which, 
by the results in Sects. 144 and 211, are indeed tensors under change of frame. The principle 
of material indifference requires that any relation between such tensors be a tensor relation 
under change of frame. But some variables occurring in constitutive relations are not tensors 
under change of frame, the vorticity w and the deformation tensor C being examples. The 
classical theory of finite elastic strain (Sect. 302) relates t to C; its constitutive equations 
satisfy the principle of material indifference, but the elastic coefficients do not generally 
transform as tensors under change of frame. 1 [1829, 4]. 
2 [1903, 20 and 21] [1937, 12, Chap. I, § 2]. 3 [1955. 18, § 4], "isotropy of space"; [1957. 11, § 9] [1959, 9, § 7] [1958, 8, § 11], 
"principle of objectivity". A noteworthy earlier attempt is given by ÜLDROYD [1950, 22]: 
"The form of the completely general equations must be restricted by the requirement that 
the equations describe properties independent of the frame of reference ... Moreover, only 
those tensor quantities need be considered which have a significance for the material element 
independent of its motion as a whole in space." ÜLDROYD's process is to write all constitutive 
equations in convected co-ordinates, extension to spatial systems then being achieved by 
imposing tensorial invariance. Cf. LonGE [1951, 16]. While this procedure leads to correct 
results, it is not the only one possible, nor is ÜLDROYD's formulation of the problern unequivocal. TheprinciplesofRIVLINandERICKSEN [1955, 21, § 11 ff], ofTHOMAS [1955, 24and25], 
and of CoTTER and RrvLIN [1955. 4], which likewise rest upon use of special co-ordinate 
systems, are special cases of NoLL's. 
704 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 294. 
of stress as arising from deformation and flux of energy from changes of temperature emerges, not without reason, as a first approximation; but on a finer 
scale, it is illusory. Any attempt to draw precise conclusions from statistical 
theories show that the classical separation of phenomena is artificial and unphysical1. 
For energetico-mechanical phenomena, a principle denying any fundamental 
separation was formulated by TRUESDELL 2 : The stress and the flux of energy 
depend upon the same variables. Here we propose the following more general 
principle oj equipresence: A variable present as an independent variable in one 
constitutive equation should be so present in alt. 
Let it not be thought that this principle would invalidate the classical separate 
theories in the cases for which they are intended, or that no separation of effects 
remains possible. Quite the reverse: The various principles of invariance, stated 
above, when brought to bear upon a general constitutive equation have the 
effect of restricting the manner in which a particular variable, such as the spin 
tensor or the temperature gradient, may occur. The classical separations may 
always be expected, in one form or another, for small changes-not as assumptions, but as proven consequences of invariance requirements. The principle of 
equipresence states, in effect, that no restrictions beyond those of invariance are 
to be imposed in constitutive equations. It may be regarded as a natural extension of ÜCKHAM's razor as restated by NEWTON 3 : "We are to admit no more 
causes of natural things than such as are both true and sufficient to explain 
their appearances, for nature is simple and affects not the pomp of superfluous 
causes." This more general approach has the added value of showing in what 
way the classical Separations fail to hold when interactions actually occur. We 
illustrate these remarks in Sect. 307, below. 
II. Examples of kinematical constitutive equations. 
294. Rigid bodies. A body is rigid if it is susceptible of rigid motions only: 
The distance between any two particles of the body is constant in time. The 
motion of the body is then completely determined when the position of one particle and the orientation of an appropriate rigid frame with origin at that particle 
are given as functions of time. For any body, rigid or not, the motion of the 
center of mass c is determined from the total assigned force by integration of 
(196.6). This fact is of little or no use when deformation occurs, since the center 
of mass generally moves about and fails to reside in any one particle, but the 
center of mass of a rigid body is stationary within it; more precisely, in any frame 
with respect to which the body is at rest, the center of mass c is also at rest. 
Thus we may say that the motion of the center of mass determines, or, more 
properly, constitutes the translatory motion of the rigid body. 
The kinematical statement that there exists a frame with respect to which 
the body is permanently at rest may be expressed in terms of the tensor of 
inertia and the moment of momentum as follows: In a suitably selected frame, 
denoted by a prime, we have 
il'[O'l = 0, ~'[0'] = 0 (294.1) 
for all t. These are the constitutive equations of a rigid body. Substituting them 
into the general equations of balance of moment of momentum (197.3) 4 and 
1 M. BRILLOUIN [1900, 1, § 37]. supported by many later results. 2 [1949, 34, § 19] [1951, 27, § 19], "BRILLOUIN's Principle". 3 [1687, 1, Lib. III, Hypoth. I]. 
Sect. 295. Diffusion of mass in a mixture. 705 
(197.4) yields Euler's equations forarigid body1 : 
w -~'[ '1 +wx~'[ 'l. w = ~[O'J_ c'xWlb. (294.2) 
Here ~[O'l is the applied torque with respect to 0'. The last term on the righthand side vanishes if 0' is the center of mass: c' = 0; it vanishes also if there is 
some one particle of the body which moves at uniform velocity in an inertial 
frame and if 0' is chosen at that particle: b = 0. In these cases and in any others 
when c' X b is known, the angular velocity w of any frame rigidly attached to the 
body is determined to within an arbitrary initial value by the applied torque, the 
mass and the translatory motion of the body, and the tensor of inertia ~'[O'J with 
respect to the same frame. This conclusion follows from the existence and uniqueness of 
solution to (294.2), which is a non-linear differential equation of first order for w. 
Thus the purely kinematical assumption that the motion is persistently rigid 
renders it simply determinable. This is no wonder, for the infinite nurober of 
degrees of freedom generally present in a body of finite mass and volume have 
been reduced to six. While the laws of motion (196-3) are linear in an inertial 
frame, EULER's equations (294.2) are non-linear, since they state the balance of 
moment of momentum in a non-inertial frame, the coupling between these frames 
being that expressed by the principles of apparent torques in Sect. 197. 
In a rigid body, we are at liberty to imagine internal stress and flux of energy 
and their respective balances, but since the motion is determinate without these 
considerations, we invoke ÜCKHAM's razor 2 to excise them. 
A theorem of balance of mechanical energy follows from (294.2). Choosing 
the origin of the primed frame at c, by (168.8) and (168.9) we obtain 
2~ = Wlc 2 + w. ~[o'J. w. 
By differentiating this result and using (196.6) and (294.2) we obtain 
Sr= iJ. c + ~'[O'J. w. 
(294.3) 
(294.4) 
This equation asserts that the entire rate of working of the applied force iJ in 
producing the translatory motion and of the applied torque ~'[O'J in producing 
the rotation is converted into kinetic energy. Assumptions analogaus to those 
discussed in Sect. 218 suffice to derive from (294.4) a law of conservation of total 
energy. 
The theory of rigid bodies is presented in detail in the article by SYNGE in 
this volume. 
295. Diffusion of mass in a mixture. A simple theory of diffusion of mass in 
a non-uniform binary mixture was proposed by FrcK3 : The rate of diffusion of 
1 The theory is usually and justly attributed to EULER [ 1765, 1]; it has a lang prior and 
a short but important subsequent history, which has never been adequately traced. 2 Adopted byNEWTON [1687, 1] as the first ofthe"Hypotheses", calledinlatereditions 
Rules of Philosophizing", set at the head of Book III. On p. 704, we have quoted in full the 
statement in the edition of 1687. 
Here we mention that the usual derivation of EuLER's equations given in textbooks 
must also be excised by ÜCKHAM's razor. That derivation rests on an argument, summarized 
in Sect. 196 A, showing that if all the mutual forces between the particles of a body are central 
and pairwise cancelling, balance of momentum implies balance of moment of momentum. 
In a rigid body, by definition, the mutual forces never manifest themselves in any way except 
to maintain rigidity. Rigidity has already been assumed, and it suffices; to hypothecate 
mutual forces is to multiply causes. In any case, the derivation is absurd from the Standpoint 
of modern physics, which does not represent the smallest portians of any kind of body as 
stationary centers of force. 3 FicK [1855, 1, pp. 65-66] gave as his only physical basis an assertion that diffusion 
of matter in a binary mixture at uniform total density and pressure seems analogaus to flow 
of heat according to FouRIER's theory (Sect. 296). 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. Ill/1. 45 
706 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 295. 
mass of the constituent m: is proportional to the gradient of the density of that 
constituent and is such as to tend to restore uniformity. In equations, 
D>O, m:=1,2, (295.1) 
where the coefficient D, the diffusivity, has the physical dimensions [L 2 r-1]. 
FICK assumed that f!,k = 0, as indeed is necessary in orderthat (295.1) be compatible with (158.8) 1 • Substituting (295.1) into (159.2) 2 , an expression of the conservation of mass, we have the diffusion equation: 
(295.2) 
where (159.4) is assumed to hold. This equation is of the same form as the 
isotropic case of FouRIER's equation (296.10). 
FrcK's law was proposed and has been applied under various specializing 
hypotheses, typically that c~1 =0, that there is no mean motion, and that the 
pressure is constant. Also, only a binary mixture was envisioned, and while formally (295.1) is meaningful for an arbitrary nurober of constituents, it does not 
allow for their possible mutual actions. While there have been numerous studies1 
1 The main features of a general theory of diffusion might have been found in the kinetic 
theory of gases; indeed, MAXWELL [1860, 2, Prop. XVIII] [1867, 2, Eq. (76)] emphasized 
the fact that diffusion arises from equal and opposite forces proportional to the differences of 
velocities, so that (295-5) is virtually suggested by him. However the later development of 
the formal theory (e.g. [1939, 6, § 8.4]), emphasizing special features of the binary case, 
tended to obscure the simple mechanical idea. The effort of HELLUND [1940, 13] to calculate 
the basic equations for multi-constituent mixtures according to the kinetic theory did not 
lead to clear results. 
The general continuum theory based upon (295.5) and (295.8) may fairly be attributed 
to STEFAN [1871, 6, Eqs. (3)], who gave the special case of (295.6) appropriate to a ternary 
mixture of perfect fluids, but his work seems to have attracted no attention, and many 
inferior attempts were published later. DuHEM [1893, 2, Chap. VI, §I] in effect noted that 
a constitutive equation forafluid mixture should specify the functional form of piJ!, but 
instead of perceiving a connection with Frcx's law, he proposed to determine the piJ! by 
assuming the mixture to be such that all constituents may participate in a common infinitely 
small isentropic motion. We do not understand the meanings of all the terms in the theories 
of diffusion proposed by }AUMANN [1911, 7, §XXXVI] [1918, 3, §§ 136-141, 150-154] 
and LoHR [1917, 5, §§ 5, 7, 12, 15]. 
A thermodynamic theory of diffusion, including thermal diffusion and the diffusionthermal effect, seems first to have been proposed by EcKART [1940, 8, Eq. (49)]. Cf. the 
earlier and more special theory of ÜNSAGER and Fuoss [1932, 10, § 4.12]. A more fully 
elaborated theory of the same kind, adopting the "Onsager relations ", was proposed independently by MEIXNER [1941, 2, § 5] [1943, 2, § 2] [1943, 3, § 4]. The later Iiterature 
in this field does not always take pains to recognize all the conditions laid down by MEIXNER 
but otherwise seems to diverge from his work only in minor points; cf. LAMM [1944, 7], LEAF 
[1946, 7, Eq.(48)), PRIGOGINE [1947, 12, Chap. 10, §§ 1 and 5, Chap. 11, §3], DE GROOT [1952, 
3, §§ 45-46], KIRKWOOD and CRAWFORD [1952, 12], HIRSCHFELDER, CURTISS and BIRD [1954, 
9, § 11.2d]. There is also a more primitive theory of ÜNSAGER [1945, 4, pp. 242-247], 
resting upon an inverse of (295.4); apparently only special circumstances were envisioned, 
but it is not clear what they are. In the thermodynamic theories, little if any use is made 
of mechanical concepts and principles. 
Meanwhile, clear results from the kinetic theory approximations for a multi-constituent 
mixture had been obtained byCowLING [1945, 2, Eq.(34)]; since his dl}! is approximately 
(though not exactly) proportional to our piJ!, his result is equivalent to the inverse of a special 
caseof (295-5). Hisanalysis was generalized by CuRTISS and HIRSCHFELDER [1949, 4, Eqs. (19), 
(20), (21)] so as to include thermal diffusion; after allowance is made for the approximations 
of the kinetic theory, their result is seentobe a special case of (295-5). In the kinetic theory 
the relation (295-8) is valid in first approximation even if st >2 but has not been shown 
to hold in a more accurate treatment. 
The theory of STEFAN was proposed anew by ScHLÜTER [1950, 25, Eq. (3)], [1951, 23, 
Eqs. (1) to (3)] and by JoHNSON [1951, 14]; the latter gave an argument indicating that 
F!BIJ!/(!!B(!IJ! is roughly independent of the densities. 
Sect. 295. Diffusion of mass in a mixture. 707 
of more general cases, we prefer to follow an independent argument 1 toward 
a linear theory of diffusion which reduces to FicK's law under the conditions in 
which it is usually applied. 
First, we note that by means of (158.8), we may express (295.1) alternatively in 
theform 
1 em e!B e'2l e!B , , e'll,k= 2n (elßu!Bk-e'Hu'Hk)=-eD(u!Bk-u'Hk) =en(x!Bk- xu), (295-3) 
still for a binary mixture. This symmetrical expression indicates that it is an 
excess of the mass flow of one constituent over another's that increases the density 
gradient of the latter. Thus for a general mixture we might have 
~ ~ 
em,k = L Y!B'H (e'H u!B k - e'll u!Bk) = L .F!B ~~ (x!Bk - Xmk). (295 .4) !B~l !B~l 
But since the right-hand side of this relation is equal to a linear combination 
of the excess of the momenta of all constituents above the momentum of the 
constituent lll:, a still more natural idea of diffusion is expressed by the more 
general constitutive equation ~ 
eP'H = L .Flß'll (x!B- x'll), (295.5) !B~l 
where P'H is the supply of momentum, defined by (215.2) and restricted by (215.5). 
In this relation the purely kinematical view expressed in FICK's law (295.1) is 
replaced by a dynamical one: Diffusion gives rise to a force tending to restore 
uniformity. The dynamical equations corresponding to (295.5) follow at once 
from (215 .2) : ~ 
("k jk) km " ;= ( 'k 'k) e~( x'H - 'll - t'll, m = L.. \ll'll x!B - x'll . (295.6) !B~l 
Since c'll=O, in order that (295.5) be consistent with the balance of total 
momentum in the mixture, expressed by (215.5), it is necessary and sufficient 
that ~ 
L (.F!B'll- .F'llm) = o. 'H~l 
When ~ =2, this result is equivalent to 2 
.F'llm= .F!B'll· 
1 The ideas given here are presented more fully by TRUESDELL [1960, 6]. 
(295.7) 
(295 .8) 
2 This condition, for the binary case, originated in the work of MAXWELL [ 1860, 2, 
Prop. XVIII], to whom is due the appeal to "NEWTON's third law" which JoHNSON [1951, 14] 
phrased more generally: "The force exerted by species ~ on species 18 is equal in magnitude 
and opposite in direction to that exerted by 18 on ~ .... " The argument in the text above, 
basically different in that it rests upon the principle of linear momentum, was first suggested 
by STEFAN [1871, 6, p. 74]: "Da die ... Kräfte aus Wechselwirkungen zwischen den im 
Element dx dy dz zur selben Zeit befindlichen Teilchen des ersten und zweiten Gases entspringen, so ändern sie die Bewegung des Schwerpunktes dieses Elementes nicht." Indeed, 
this establishes (295.8) in the binary case, but if .lt >2, only (295-7) follows. For the ternary 
case, STEFAN assumed (295.8) without analysis or comment. On the other hand, there is 
twofold insufficiency in the argument of MAXWELL and J OHNSON, for in order to invoke 
"NEWTON's third law" we have to know that the diffusive term represents the entire force 
arising from the mutual forces of the two species, which it generally does not, and, secondly, 
the influence of species GI: upon the mutual action of species ~ and 18 is left out of account. 
We feel the true content of the Maxwell-Johnson argument does not yield a proof but merely 
suggests the supplementary assumption (1) in the text above, stating that species GI: has 
no effect upon the relative diffusion of species ~ and 18. 
The relations (295.8) for arbitrary .lt may weil be named "STEFAN's relations ". The 
"Onsager reciprocity relations" for pure diffusion refer to a different set of coefficients. 
LAMM [1954, llA], who considered STEFAN's relations to be "self-evident for physical 
reasons ", showed that they are equivalent to ÜNSAGER's relations when .lt = 3; for general .lt, 
this is established by TRUESDELL [1960, 6] .. 
45* 
708 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 295· 
but if ~ >2, such a relation of syrnmetry does not hold without further assumptions. It may be shown tobe sufficient that (1) r~~ shall not depend upon 1?<!: 
if (i: =f=\ll or l8 and (2) r~~ =0 if e~=O. 
To satisfy the additional requirement (243.6), expressing balance of total 
energy in the mixture, it suffices to assume the additional constitutive relation 
.1\ 
e i~ = t L: rf8~( (~lB -~~,) , f8=1 
(295 .9) 
as is easily verified. Thus a definite supply of energy is associated with the diffusive supply of momentum. Such supplies of energy, though dynamically required, have never before appeared in a theory of diffusion, perhaps because the 
diffusive motions are considered small enough that quadratic terms are negligible. 
To see the relation between (295.5) and FrcK's lawl, we consider the assumptions usual in connection with this latter. The applied forces are supposed to 
balance the accelerations, x~ = f~, and t~m reduces to a hydrostatic pressure: 
t~}k=-P~c5!;'. Then (295.6) becomes 
.lt 
P<JI,k = L r!B<Jl (ulBk- U<Jik). 
f8=1 
(295 .10) 
If, further, P<JI oc e~. as is the case in a gas mixture at uniform temperature, 
then (295.10) reduces to (295-3), which, for a binary mixture, has already been 
shown to be equivalent to FrcK's law. 
A precise mathematical study of the motion of mixtures and of constitutive 
equations appropriate to them has never been attempted. We venture the 
following proposal of constitutive equations forageneraldass of diffusive motions: 
cm =0, ) 
Pm =Fm (~lB- ~m), 
Em = Gm (~f8 - ~m) , 
(295.11) 
whereF<Jl and G~ are functions of the indicated arguments, l8 =1, 2, ... , ~- These 
relations assert that each constituent mass is separately conserved but that the 
momentum and internal energy of the constituent lli changes in response to the 
diffusive motion of each other constituent in respect to it. The functions entering 
(295.11) are subject to the requirements (215.5) and (243.6), which here take the 
forms 
.lt 
L:F<JI=O, 
<Jl=l 
5t 
L: (G<JI + ~<JI • Fm) = 0, 
<Jl=l 
(295.12) 
as well as to restrictions following from the fact that Pm is a vector and i'll is 
a scalar. Nothing is presumed, however, regarding the material constitutive 
equations for the constituents, which may be perfect fluids, viscous fluids, etc. 
If chemical reactions are occurring, we must generally assume that c~=f=O. 
The usual constitutive equations for chemical reactions have already been given 
as Eqs. (159A.6). The reaction rates la occurring there are to be restricted by 
use of such information as is available concerning the substances participating 
in the reactions 2• 
1 Our steps reverse those given for a special case by JoHNSON and HULBERT [1950, 13, 
Eqs. (1) to (3)]. 
2 Cf. ECKART [1940, 8, p. 274], MEIXNER [1943, 2, § 2] [1943, 3, § 4]. 
Sect. 296. FouRIER's law of heat conduction. 709 
111. Example of an energetic constitutive equation. 
296. FouRIER's law of heat conduction. Let it be supposed that the flux of 
energy hk is a linear function of the temperature gradient e, m. Then 1 
hk=xkm(),m· (296.1) 
While the quantities xkm are introduced simply as coefficients in a linear relation 
in some particular co-ordinate system, their law of transformation is easily 
inferred. Since hk, by hypothesis, is a Euclidean contravariant tensor, while () 
is a scalar, from the quotient law of tensors it follows that xkm is a contravariant 
tensor of second order. Moreover, if as in Sect. 241 we put hr = (hk, 0) in Euclidean 
frames and take () as a world scalar, by defining xrLl as the world tensor such that 
(296.2) 
in every Euclidean frame, we may put (296.1) into world-invariant form: 
(296.3) 
It is unusual to be able to ascertain so easily a world-invariant constitutive relation. The principle of material indifference (Sect. 293) is satisfied if x is assumed 
independent of all kinematic variables 2, although it may depend upon the temperature and other scalars. 
The tensor x is the thermal conductivity. 
A body is thermally isotropic if (296.1) is an isotropic relation; in this casE, 
the tensor x is an isotropic tensor; hence xkm =xgkm, where x is a scalar, so 
that (296.1) reduces to the form 3 
(296.4) 
Since the sign of hk e,k depends upon x and e.P alone, application of the consequence (258.1) 2 of the entropy inequality to (296.1) and (296.2) shows that 
xkm is positive semi-definite or x ~ 0, (296.5) 
respectively, unless there are thermal constraints limiting the range of () k. 
Substitution of this result into (241.7) does not yield much enlighten'ment in 
general. When, however, assumptions sufficient to derive (241.8) are added, we 
obtain 
(296.6) 
where n is the unit normal to the discontinuity. This is the condition appropriate 
to the interface of two materials having different thermal conductivities, provided, 
of course, that the surface not be the seat of sources of energy. In the isotropic 
case, we thus obtain 4 
[x ~~] =0. (296.7) 
1 DUHAMEL [1832, 1, PP· 361-366]. 2 However, it is not impossible for x to depend upon the velocity gradient. E.g., if xFA = 
C LJFA, where LJFA is the world tensor of stretching, the principle of material indifference 
is satisfied. Cf. Sect. 307 below. 3 FoURIER [1822, 1, § 98]. There isaformal similarity to NEWTON's law for the radiative 
cooling through a boundary. 4 FouRIER [1822, 1, § 146]. 
710 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 297. 
When the temperature itself is continuous, we may put W =()in (175..8); substituting the result into (296.6) and rearranging yields 
(296.8) 
By (296.5), the coefficient of the first jump is positive unless x+ =0. Thus we 
obtain the following result: Apart from the case when the conductivity vanishes 
on one side of a surface on which () is continuous, the thermal flux (296.1) cannot suffer a discontinuity unless also the normal conductivity nk ukm, or, in the 
isotropic case, the conductivity u, is discontinuous. 
Substitution of (296.1) into the general equation (241.4) of energy balance 
makes it possible to deterrnine s when the stress, the motion, the temperature, 
and the supply of energy are known. This is not, however, the classical approach 
to problems of heat conduction, which rests, if often rather obscurely, upon 
additional assumptions leading to the completely recoverable case described in 
Sect. 256A. By (256A.2), (256.2) 2 , and (296.1) we have 
eO~=(ukm(),m),k+eq. (296.9) 
If it is further supposed that the material is ideal 1 in the sense defined in 
Sect. 253, so that 17 =1] (O,X), then (296.9) reduces toFourier's equation ofthermal conduction 2 : 
• 1 
C () = - (ukm () m) k + q, (! • • (296.10) 
c being a known function of () and possibly also of X. When the velocity field ii, 
the density (!, and the supply of energy q are known, (296.10) is a partial differential equation for the temperature. In particular, in a material at rest we 
have 3 
i}() 1 
c- = - (ukm 0 ) k + q. ot e ,m. (296.11) 
The foregoing derivation may seem more laborious than that to which the 
reader is accustomed. This is so because the classical argument, deriving in part 
from researches prior to the establishment of the general principles of thermomechanics, condenses all the assumptions into a single one (essentially, that all 
thermal flux arises solely by transference of a caloric energy which is proportional 
to the temperature), with no connection to other domains of physics. 
IV. Examples of mechanical constitutive equations. 
297. Perfeet fluids. A continuous medium is a perfect fluid if it can support 
no shearing stress and no couple stress. By the theorem of CAUCHY given in 
Sect. 204, the stress tensor t is then in all circumstances hydrostatic, t = - p 1, 
and from CAUCHY's first law of motion (205.2) we have Euler's dynamical 
equation4 : 
e;E =- gradp + ef. (297.1) 
CAUCHY's second law (205.11) is satisfied automatically; in other words, balance 
of linear momentum in a perfect fluid implies balance of moment of momentum, 
1 This assumption is made in a disguised form by VorGT [1889, 9, pp. 743-759] [1895. 8, 
Part III, Chap. I, § 6-9] [1910, 10, §§ 277. 381-382, 389, 392]. 2 FouRIER [1833. 1, Eq. (3)], for the isotropic case. 3 FouRIER [1822, 1, §§ 127-128], for the isotropic case. 4 11757. 2, §§ 20-21]. The theory had a lang earlier history in special cases. 
Sect. 297. Perfeet fluids. 711 
so long as there be no extrinsic couples, while if extrinsic couples are present, 
the perfect fluid is incompatible with the principles of mechanics (cf. Sect. 293 ot). 
From (205.4) we have at once Christollel's condition1 : 
[p] n + e± U± [::V] = o; (297.2) 
hence 2 
(297.3) 
We distinguish two cases. First, assume that U+ = u- =0, or that [in] =0, 
orthat both these conditions hold; then (297.3) 1 reduces to 
[p] = 0: (297.4) 
Across a singular surface which is material and across all waves other than shock 
waves, the pressure is continuous. Second, assume e+ U+ =!= 0. Then (297.3) 2 
yields [::Vt] = 0: (297.5) 
In a perfect fluid, shock waves are always longitudinal. This last result can be 
extended to waves of higher order, as follows. By (297.4), we may put W =P 
in (175.8) and conclude that [grad p] is parallel to n, and hence, by (297.1), 
on the assumption that I is continuous, it follows that [~] is parallel to n. Therefore, the tangential acceleration is continuous across all material singularities and 
all waves other than shock waves 3, and, in particular, acceleration waves are always 
longitudinal. For waves of third order, a parallel argument applied to the gradient 
of (297.1) shows that l:f is parallel to n. By induction, then, a perfect fluid admits 
only longitudinal waves 4 • By (191.2) and (191.7), a wave of k-th order carries 
. (k-1) • (k-1) (k-1) (k-1) 
JUmps of xn , d1v :v , log e, and dk- 1 pjdnk-1, but leaves unaffected :V1 , 
curl (ki1), and all tangential derivatives of p up to the k- 1-st order. Finally, 
in an isochoric motion of a perfect fluid, wave Propagation of any kind is impossible 5, the only compatible discontinuities being material. 
Note that all the foregoing results follow at once from the definition of aperfect fluid and from the principles of kinematics and mechanics; none of the usual 
specializing assumptions have been invoked. 
Returning to consideration of (297.1), assume that field I of assigned force 
be lamellar; the mechanical significance of this assumption has been presented 
in Sect. 218. From (297.1) we have then 
w* == curl ~ = grad p X grad _!_ • (297.6) (! 
By interpreting this formula in the light of results given in Sect. 108, we derive 
Kelvin's theorem6 : A flow of a perfect fluid subject to lamellar assigned force is 
circulation preserving if and only if there exists a functional relation 
f(P.e.t) =O; (297.7) 
1 [1877, 2, § 1]. 2 Eqs. (297 .3) form a part of the set called "the Rankine-Hugoniot equations ". Further 
references are given in Sect. 205 andin footnote 2, p. 713. 
3 HADAMARD[1903, 11, ~ 244]. MOREAU [1952, 13, §Sc] notes that the conditionn X(;})]= 0, 
or Curl;}) = 0 on the surface, is analogaus to the D' ALEMBERT-EULER condition curl;}) = 0 
in space, and thus he derives a superficial analogue of KELVIN's theorem; cf. his results presented in Sect. 186, but note that, in cantrast to KELVIN's theorem, barotropic flow is not 
required. 
' Proved for acceleration waves by HUGONIOT [1887, 2, Part I, § 12], for shock waves 
and waves of higher order by HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~ 242] and DuHEM [1901, 7, Part II, 
Chap. IV, § 2]. 
5 HADAMARD [1903, 11, ~~ 245-246], DuHEM [1901, 7, Part II, Chap. I, § 10]. 6 [1869, 7, § 59(d)]. 
712 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 297. 
altematively, if and only if, for each fixed time, the pressure is constant, or the 
density is constant, or the surfaces p = const coincide with the surfaces e = const. 
Isochoric flows, in which each particle has the same density, are included as a 
special case. 
KELVIN's theorem is regarded as the fundamental theorem of classical hydrodynamics. Flows satisfying (297.7) are called barotropic1• 
A perfect fluid may be such that a11 its flows are barotropic; this is the case 
for homogeneous incompressible fluids, for which e = eo = const in space and time, 
and for piezotropic fluids, for which there is an equation of state of the form 
p =f(e) (discussed more generally in Sect. 253). But these conditions are merely 
sufficient, not necessary, for barotropic flow. For example, in a fluid having 
equations of state p =F(e, 0) =G(e, 'Y)), special conditions may Iead to an isothermal flow, in which (J = const, or to an isentropic flow, in which 'Y) = const; 
any such flow, obviously, is barotropic, but the functional form of f in (297.7) 
depends upon the particular conditions giving rise to the flow. 
While various thermodynamic circumstances may determine whether or not 
a particular flow be barotropic, KELVIN's theorem shows that these circumstances, 
once it has been ascertained that an equation of the form (297.7) does in fact hold, 
may be largely disregarded. For when (297.7) holds, all the numerous theorems 
appropriate to circulation preserving motion may be applied: the Helmholtz 
vorticity theorems (Sect. 108), Bemoullian theorems of various kinds (Sects. 125 
to 126), with the acceleration-potential V* being given by 2 
V*= r~et +V+ g(t), f =- gradv, (297.8) 
HELMHOLTz's theorem of conservation of energy (Sect. 218)-indeed, all the 
generat theorems of classical hydrodynamics follow at once from the circulation 
preserving property, as we have taken pains to show in Sects. 105 to 138. The 
theory of irrotational motion is included as an important special case. When 
we combine HADAMARD's theorem of Sect. 190 with the result proved above 
that acceleration waves are necessarily longitudinal, we see that the passage 
of waves other than shock waves leaves the circulation unchanged, and, in particular, 
the Lagrange-Cauchy theorem on the permanence of irrotational flow (Sect. 134) 
is unimpaired by the passage of waves other than shock waves 3• 
In the case of a barotropic flow that is neither isochoric nor isobaric, we may 
write (297.1) in the form 
:r = - c2 grad (log e) + f, c2 == :: . (297.9) 
Hence at an acceleration wave we have 
[ .. 1_ 2 [dloge] Xn - - C ---a;;- . (297.10) 
Comparison of this formula with the kinematical identity (190.10) yields U2 =c2• 
This is Hugoniot's theorem 4 : The speed of propagation of acceleration waves is c. 
1 BJERKNEsetal. [1933, 3, §§ 1, 24]. 2 EULER [17 57, 2, § 35] [1770, 1, § 42]. 3 Hinted by HUGONIOT [1887, 2, Part I, § 12], proved exp!icit!y by HADAMARD [1903, 
10, ~~ 254-255]. 4 [1885, 3] [1887, 2, Part I, § 10]. As remarked in [1885, 4] [1887, 2, Part II, §§ 11-12], 
the result still holds if (297. 7) is replaced by p = f (e, t, X); while HuGONIOT used a formulation 
in material variables to establish this more general result, it also follows easily by noting that 
(297·9h is modified only by the addition of - ; ::1% X~k· which is continuous across an 
acceleration wave. 
Scct. 297. Perfeet fluids. 713 
Similar analysis applied to the results in Sect. 191 shows that U2 =c2 for waves 
of higher order. In view of (297.9) 2 , these results may be interpreted as follows 1 : 
Given a barotropic flow in which neither the pressure nor the density is uniform, 
a necessary and sutficient condition for wave Propagation to be possible is that the 
pressure be an increasing function of the density; this being so, waves of all orders 
greater than 1 propagate with the unique speed c. Since c is the common speed of 
propagation of so many kinds of waves, it is called the speed of sound. 
The speed of propagation of a shock wave satisfies (205.7), which reduces when 
t = -P 1 to the celebrated Rankine-Hugoniot equation 2 
or U+ u- = [P] 
[e] . (297.11) 
The formal similarity of these results to (297.9) 2 is deceiving, for these are purely 
dynamical and do not presume the existence of a barotropic relation (297.7) on 
either side of the shock. If there is such a relation, it need not have the same 
form on each side of the shock; i.e., [p] = j+ (e+)- t (e-), where the functions j+ 
and 1- need not be the same. In order to conclude that a shock of given strength 
propagates at a definite speed, it is necessary to supply further assumptions. 
Flows in which no relation of the form (297.7) holds are called baroclinic 3• 
The theory of these flows is more complicated and cannot be approached in such 
generality. We consider only the commonest special case. It is assumed that 
the fluid obeys a caloric equation of state of the form 13 = f ('YJ, v) relating specific 
internal energy 13 to specific entropy 'YJ and specific volume v = 1/(!, and that the 
pressurepinEULER's equation (297.1) isthethermodynamicpressure: p = n =- T, 
where T is given by (247.1h Then Dt=O and m=O in (256.11), and (256.12) 
yields PE=P1 • It is customary to puth=O andq=O; by(256.2) 2 , QE=O. In 
physical terms, it has been assumed that all work done is fully recoverable and 
that there is neither heat flux nor any source of heat. From the balance of 
energy as expressed by (256.6) it then follows that 
~=0: (297.12) 
The entropy of each particle remains constant, where we have assumed that 
0 =f:O. 
If there exists a surface 'YJ = const which is traversed by every particle, as 
may be presumed tobe the case in a gas flow originating from a quiet reservoir, 
it follows that 'YJ is uniform, and we fall back upon a barotropic case, but one of 
a particular kind: Since the barotropic relation (297.7) which holds in these conditions is obtained by putting 'YJ = const in the equation of state p = p ((!, 'YJ), 
the speed of sound as given by (297-9) now has the value 
( oP' U2 = c2 = iie )~, (297.13) 
commonly associated with the name of LAPLACE. 
If the fluid is assumed to conduct heat, however, a very different result follows. 
By putting FouRIER's law (296.4) into (256.2) 2 , we obtain QE =f: 0 in general, 
and (297.12) does not hold. We consider an acceleration wave across which 
p, 0, and the thermal conductivity u are continuous. By the result derived from 
(296.6), [grad 0] =0. By using the thermal equation of state p =P (e, 0) in 
1 HADAMARD [1903, 10, ~ 242], DuHEM [1901, 7, Part li, Chap. IV, § 2]. 2 [1870, 6, Eq. (6)] (Iineal motion); [1887, 2, §§ 144, 149]. 3 BJERKNES et al. [1933, 3, §§ 1, 24]. 
714 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 297. 
(297.1) we have 
:;; =- (~:)ograd log e- ( ::)e grad () + f. (297.14) 
Hence, in the present circumstances, 
[;i;] =- (~:) [gradloge], (297.15) 
although the flow, which is not assumed isothermal, is generally baroclinic. 
Comparison with the kinematical identity (190.10) yields1 
U2=(!_!._). ae o (297.16) 
This is the value of the speed of sound first obtained in a very special case by 
NEWTON; it is thus seen to be the speed of propagation of acceleration waves 
in a perfect fluid having a thermal equation of state p =P (e, 0) and a nonvanishing thermal conductivity x, no matter how small 2• 
Notice that in order to derive (297.13) and (297.16) we have used appropriate 
forms of the balance of energy and appropriate equations of state. The theory 
is thus a thermo-mechanical one. 
While (297.12) holds in every region free of shocks, the constant value of 'YJ 
it implies is different upon each side of the shock. That this is so follows from 
the balance of energy in the form (241.9), or, equivalently, 
[x + t U2] = o. (297.17) 
Since the functional forms of the equations of state X= X (rJ, v) and n = p = n (rJ, v) 
are assumed unchanged by any circumstance, (297.17) may be used along with 
(297.11) to calculate the relative jumps of rJ, U and p as functions of the strength 15, 
where 15 =[e]/e-=-[v]fv+. When the equation of state is restricted by suitable 
inequalities (cf. Sect. 265, esp. footnote 1, p. 656), it can be shown that the function 
U-= f (15) is monotone increasing, that /(0) =c, where c is the speed of sound 
given by (297.13), that 15~ l5max• where 15max is a number determined by the equation of state, and that /(l5max) = oo. That is, all shocks are propagated at supersonie speed relative to the fluid ahead and subsonic speed relative to the fluid 
behind; infinitely weak shocks travel at nearly sonic speed, and the stronger 
the shock, the faster it travels; but only a certain ultimate strength is possible 
in any given fluid, no matter how fast the shock3• 
When the flow ahead of the shock satisfies not only (297.12) but also the 
stronger condition 'YJ = const, the flow is barotropic and hence circulation preserving. The passage of a shock wave which is curved or oblique to the flow causes 
1 DuHEM [1901, 7, Part II, Chap. IV, § 2], KoTCHINE [1926, 3, § 3]. 2 As "~o. the speed given by (297.16) does not approach that given by (297.13), and 
when :>e=O, no wave can travel at the speed given by (297.16) except in the very special 
circumstances when (J = const. This difference ceases to seem paradoxical when we recall 
that the conduction of heat is a dissipative mechanism, and that when the second main dissipative mechanism, that of viscosity, is included in the mathematical model, both the kinds of 
waves considered here become impossible, as is shown in Sect. 298. The Iimit behavior is 
discussed by DuHEM [1901, 7, Part III, §§ 2- 3] and by SERRIN, § 57 of Mathematical Principles of Classical Fluid Mechanics, this Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII. Part 1. 
3 The first analysis of this kindisthat of STOKES [1848, 4, p. 355], faulty from failure to 
take account of the balance of energy. Fora perfect gas, the full results are due to HuGONIOT 
[1887, 2, §§ 154, 161-163]; cf. the summary of VIEILLE [1900, 10, p. 185]. The general theory 
of weak shocks had been given earlier by CHRISTOFFEL [1877. 2, §§ 2-5]. An exposition for 
general tri-variate fluids is given by SERRIN, Sect. 56 of the article just cited. 
Sect. 298. Linear!y viscous fluids. 715 
a jump of 17 which is not uniform, thus rendering the flow baroclinic and destroying the circulation preserving property, as weil as inducing a jump of vorticity1. 
Further general theorems of gas dynamics follow from furth~r assumptions; 
typically, that the flow is steady, that f = 0, etc. 2• 
298. Linearly viscous fluids. To consider a substance which in equilibrium has 
the same behavior as that predicted by EuLER's equation (297.1), viz. 
grad p = ef, (298.1) 
yet when in motion can support appropriate shearing stresses, assume that the 
stress tensor t be a linear function of the velocity x and the velocity gradient. 
By (90.1) we may write 
t =g(x,w,d), (298.2) 
where g is a linear function. The constitutive equations (298.2) define a linearly 
viscous fluid, it being supposed also that there is no couple stress: m = 0. 
We now apply the principle of material indifference (Sect. 293 0). The constitutive equation (298.2) is to have the same form for all observers. To an 
observer in a co-rotational frame, x = 0 and w = 0; for him, (298.2) reduces to 
a relation giving t as a function of d alone, and therefore, since both t and d 
transform independently of x and w [cf. (144.3) and (211.1)], it must reduce to 
such a relation for all observers. l.e. 3, 
t = f(d). (298.3) 
N ow consider frames whose axes coincide with the principal directions of d 
(Sects. 82 and 83), so that (298-3) becomes 
(298.4) 
For a definite assignment of the undirected axes different assignments of the 
positive senses yield four different positively oriented frames, any one of which 
may be obtained from any other by a rotation through a straight angle about 
one axis. Under such rotations, it follows from (82.6) that da is invariant. By 
the principle of material indifference, then, fkm in (298.4) is invariant under 
these rotations: ftm=fkm• say. But t transforms according to the tensor law; 
in particular, under rotation through a straight angle about the k-axis we have 
ttm = - tk m for k =I= m . Comparing these two results yields tk m = 0 if k =I= m. Thus 
the principal axes of stretching are also principal axes of stress. Since further 
orthogonal transformations may permute the da in any way, the principal stress tb 
is a symmetric function of them. Hence the relation (298.3) reduces to one giving 
1 Indicated by HADAMARD [1903, 10, Notelll]. A modern exposition is given by SERRIN, 
§ 54 of the article, just cited. 
Despite the above-stated facts, the speed of sound behind the shock is still given by 
(297.13). since, as remarked by TRUESDELL [1951, 36], this follows from (297.12) and the 
more general theorem proved in footnote 4 on p. 712. 
2 A development of these principles is given by TRUESDELL [1952, 23]. 
3 This equation, in an inertial frame, along with f(O) = - p 1, was taken as the definition 
of a fluid by STOKES [1845, 4, § 1]. 
716 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 298. 
t as an isotropic function of d. In other words, all fluids included in the definition 
(298.2) are necessarily isotropic1• 
The mostgenerallinear isotropic function t of a symmetric second-order tensor 
d may be written in the form 2 of the Na vier-Poisson law: 
t=-P1+Ud1+2p,d, } 
t" m m = - p (Jk + Ä. dq lJk + 2 IL d" q m r m• 
(298.5) 
where we have used the requirement that t= -p1 when d =0. From (298.5) 
it follows that t is symmetric. Therefore CAUCHY's second law in the form 
(205.11) is satisfied automatically. In other words, it is a consequence of the 
principle of material indifference that a fluid cannot support extrinsic couples; 
when there are no extrinsic couples, balance of moment of momentum follows from 
balance of momentum 3• Substitution of (298.5) into CAUCHY's first law (205.2) 
yields a system of three differential equations known, at least when subjected 
to further simplifying assumptions, as "the Navier-Stokes equations ". If the 
pressure p and the three components i" of the velocity are regarded as unknowns 
and the coefficients Ä., p, are regarded as given, the system is still underdetermined, 
but since the means of rendering it determinate are essentially the same as those 
used in the theory of perfect fluids (Sect. 297), they will not be discussed here. 
Since the physical dimensions of the coefficients Ä. and p, in (298.5) are 
[M L -1 r-1], it is plain that our definition (298.2) violates the principle stated 
in Sect. 293 e. In rectification, we replace (298.2) by the complete definition 
of a linearly viscous fluid: 
t = /(~. w, d, p, 0, 00 , fto}, (298.6) 
where, as before, f isalinear function of ~. w, and d and a continuous function 
of its remaining arguments, and where 00 and p,0 are material constants such 
that 
phys. dim ()0 = [8], phys. dim. fto = [M L -1 y-1]. (298.7) 
The presence of the first of these constants makes it possible for the fluid's response 
to deformation to vary with the temperature. Motivation for introducing the 
secon:i constant may be found in simple experiments on the resistance of fluids 
in viscometers of various kinds. Since it would be possible, still within the framework of pure mechanics, to lay down a relation like (298.6) but involving four 
1 Sometimes encountered are "anisotropic fluids" defined by constitutive relations of 
the type t~ = C~ d$ + D~, where 0 and D are general tensors of the orders indicated. Such 
an equation does not generally satisfy the principle of material indifference. Given such a 
relation in an inertial frame, for example, transformation of t and d by the appropriate laws 
to a non-inertial frame yields a relation of the same form except that the components of 0 
and D in the non-inertial frame depend upon the timet, violating the original postulate (298.2). 
In order to obtain a properly invariant theory of anisotropic fluids, it is necessary to modify 
(298.2) by introduction of some vector or vectors specifying preferred directions. Cf. the 
oriented bodies studied in Sects. 60-64 and the theory recently proposed by ERICKSEN 
[1960, 1]. 2 The simplest case of this law was proposed by NEWTON [1687, 1, Lib. II, Chap. IX]. 
For incompressible fluids, equivalent dynamical equations were obtained from a molecular 
model by NAVIER [1821, 1] [1822, 2] [1825. 1] [1827, 6]. The continuum theory of CAUCHY 
[1823, 1] [1828, 2, § 111, Eqs. (95). (96)] lacks the term -pt5:_. The general formula was 
obtained by PorssoN [1831, 2, ~~ 60-63] from a molecular model. The continuum theory, 
subject to an unjustified but easily removed specialization, is due to ST. VENANT [1843. 4] 
and STOKES [1845, 4, §§ 3- 5]. 3 The reader is to recall that in Sect. 205 symmetry of t was proved equivalent to balance 
of moment of momentum only under the assumptions that l = 0, that m= 0, and that linear 
momentum was balanced. 
Sect. 298. Linearly viscous fluids. 717 
rather than two dimensionally independent material constants, our definition 
(298.6) implies not only the kinematical restrictions we have already demonstrated 
but also dimensional ones, which we now proceed to determine. 
First, the same reasoning as given above suffices to reduce (298.6) to an 
equation of the form1 
t = f(d, p, (), ()o, f.lo) · (298.8) 
The dimensional matrix of the 11 quantities appearing in any one component 
of (298.8) is 
L T M e 
tkm -1 -2 0 (k and m fixed) 
p -1 -2 0 
d 0 -1 0 0 (6 rows) 
flo -1 -1 0 
() 0 0 0 
Oo 0 0 0 
The first 2 rows are alike: so are the next 6 and the last 2; the ninth may be 
obtained by subtracting the third from the first; thus the rank is at most 3; 
in fact, it is exactly 3· By the n-theorem, (298.8) is equivalent to a relation 
among 11 - 3 = 8 dimensionless ratios formed from the quantities entering it. 
A possible set of such ratios is tkm/P, f.lo dfp, fJj()0 • Hence (298.8) is equivalent 
to a relation of the form 2 
tjp = g (f.lo dfp, ()f()o), (298.9) 
where the function g is a dimensionless function depending linearly upon f.lodfp 
and continuously upon fJjfJ0 • Thus the requirement of dimensional invariance 
implies that p may enter the dynamical equations only in a strikingly restricted 
way. Re-examining the argument used to reduce (298.3), we see that the presence 
of additional scalar arguments does not affect it. Hence we again obtain (298.5), 
except that now the coefficients A. and f-l are shown to have restricted functional forms: 
(298.10) 
the functions f1 and /2 being dimensionless. While, as shown by (298.9), it has 
been tacitly assumed that p =f= 0 in the region considered, the assumed continuity 
of f as a function of p in (298.6) allows this restriction to be removed by inspection 
of the final result. 
The material coefficients A. and f.l are the viscosities of the fluid. The dimensional constant flo is a parameter which, in any system of units selected, may 
be assigned a numerical value representing the amount of shearing stress or other 
resistance to a given stretching that a particular physical fluid may offer. The 
dimensional constant ()0 and the dimensionles functions / 1 and /2 are parameters 
which enable representation of a viscous response varying with temperature. 
From their definitionvia (298.6), the viscosities are independent 3 of all kinematical 
1 In the following argument, we tacitly employ reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates throughout, so that all tensor components bear the physical dimensions shown in the table. The final 
results are in tensorial form and hence valid in all co-ordinates. 2 TRUESDELL [1949, 33, §§ 3, 6] [1950, 32, §§ 4, 7] [1952, 2], §§ 63-65] [1952, 22, p. 90]. 3 To speak of a "frequency-dependent viscosity" or a "non-linear viscosity", as is not 
uncommon in the Iiterature of ultrasonics and rheology, is a misleading way of saying that 
the linear law (298.5) does not hold but some particular (and usually imperfectly specified) 
non-linear law does. 
718 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 298. 
variables; according to the results (298.1 0), the viscosities are also independent 
of the pressurel, being functions of the temperature only. 
When .?. = fJ, = 0, the dynamical equations for viscous fluids reduce to EuLER's 
equation (297.1) for perfect fluids. Thus perfect fluids are often called inviscid. 
That, irrespective of the values of .?. and f-t, the equations of the theory of 
viscous fluids reduce to the same statical equation (298.1) when d = 0, is a standard example to show that the commonest statement of "D'ALEMBERT's principle" 
is false 2 ; for this reason, the portion .?. Id 1 + 2ft d of the stress is regarded 
as arising from internal friction. 
Since 
t~=2f-td~ when k=j=m, (298.11) . the quantity fJ, is the ratio of shear stress to the corresponding shearing (Sect. 82) 
of any two orthogonal elements; hence it is called the shear viscosity. 
The mean pressure (204.7) is given by . 
p - p = - (.?. + i fh) d~ = (.?. + i fh) log e . ( 298.12) 
Thus.?. + if-t, the bulk viscosity, is the ratio of the excess of the mean of the three 
normal pressures over the static pressure to the rate of condensation. To render 
this last interpretation definite, it is best to distinguish two cases. First, for an 
incompressible fluid we have e =0, and from (298.12) follows p = p in all circumstance5. Thus, for an incompressible fluid, the pressure p occurring in the constitutive relation (298.5) is always the mean pressure, and .?. drops out of all 
equations. Second, for a compressible fluid, in accord with the agreement that 
(298.1) holds in equilibrium, we take p in (298.5) tobe the same pressure as would 
hold in equilibrium under the same thermodynamic conditions, i.e., p = n = 
n (e, 0) as given by the thermal equation of state. This pressure is then determined, 
independently of the motion, as soon as e and (} are known. (298.12) relates this 
pressure to the mean of the pressures actually exerted upon three perpendicular 
planes at the point in question. (A pressure-measuring device, in general, measures 
some component of the stress tensor; in a viscous fluid, it is not justifiable to 
identify either p or p with the results of measurement, a theory of the flow near 
the instrument being required in order to interpret the experimental values in 
terms of the variables occurring in the theory.) 
1 I.e., to obtain viscosities which depend also upon the pressure, it is necessary to start 
with a definition more generat than (298.6): A constant or scalar bearing the dimension of 
time or stress must be included, as is done in the following section. Cf. the discussion of 
this point by TRUESDELL [1950, 30, §§ 4, 7, 11] [1952, 21, §§ 62-63]. 2 I.e., to obtain "the" equations of motion from the statical equations, for a given system, 
add the "inertia force" -x to the assigned forcelper unit mass. lf (298.1) are the statical 
equations, then this form of "D' ALEMBERT's principle" is to be supplemented by adding 
to the "inertial force" any "frictional forces" that may be present. "Frictional forces" 
are then defined as any forces arising from motion other than inertial force. Putting all these 
definitionstagether Ieads to the conclusion that D' ALEMBERT's principle asserts that equations 
of motion follow from statical equations by supplying inertial force plus such other forces 
as may arise in conjunction with motion. Thus D' ALEMBERT's principle appears to have no 
content at all. 
To the reader who finds this confusing we remark that it was not by oversight that from 
the !ist of guiding principles in Sect. 293 we omitted "D' ALEMBERT's principle ", for we consider it to be either trivial or false in the usual statements in this context. (This does not 
affect the validity of the different "D'ALEMBERT-LAGRANGE principle" given in Sect. 232.) 
Acorrect statement, revealing the limited but useful validity ofthisform of the principle, 
is as follows: Given the statical equations for a material, constitutive equations for a dynamically 
possible material resuZt if I is replaced by I- x. This special kind of material, being only one 
of the infinitely many that share the same statical properties, is called "perfect ". This definition 
applies to several classical theories. 
Sect. 298. Linearly viscous fluids. 
The stress power (217.4) assumes the form 
P =PE= tkmdkm =-Pd~+ J.(d~} 2 + 2fl d!, d'/:, 
while by the above agreement regarding p we have from (256.4) 1 
P1 =- pd~. 
Hence Eq. (256.6) for production of total entropy becomes 
e o ~ = cJ> + h~p + e q. 
where 
719 
(298.13) 
(298.14) 
(298.15) 
(298.16) 
[It is plain that t (/> is a dissipation function in the sense of (241 A.2).] If we adopt 
the corollary (258.1)1 of the entropy inequality, we conclude that (/> as given 
by (298.16) must be a positive semi-definite quadratic form. An easy analysis 
of (298.16) shows that this is the case if and only if1 
ft-;;;,o, 3J.+2fl-;;;,o. (298.17) 
These results have immediate mechanical interpretations. By (298.11), (298.17)1 
asserts that the shear stress always opposes the shearing. By (298.12), (298.17) 2 
asserts that in order to produce condensation ( expansion), a mean Pressure not 
less (not greater) than that required to maintain equilibrium at the same density 
and temperature must be applied. These interpretations, showing that the effect 
of the viscous stresst +P 1 as given by (298.5) is always toresist change of shape 
or bulk, reinforce the view that the viscous stress is of the nature of frictional 
resistance. 
The quantity C/> in (298.15) is the viscous dissipation of energy per unit 
volume. As (298.15) shows, this energy goes into the increase of entropy, or is 
carried off by the flux - h, or is drawn away by sinks - q. It is customary 
torender the theory moredefinite by setting q =0 and adopting FoURIER's law 
(296.4). The resulting equations furnish an example, somewhat more typical 
than the perfect non-conducting gas (Sect. 297), of a fully thermomechanical 
theory, in which the basic principles of mechanics, energetics, and thermodynamics are employed. 
The presence of viscosity has the effect of rendering propagation of most 
kinds of waves impossible. We consider here only the simplest case, that of an 
acceleration wave, across which p, x, and e are continuous. By substituting 
(298.5) into the dynamical conditions (205.5) we obtain 
Ank[x;q] +!lnm[im,k] +!lnm[.ik,m] =0, (298.18} 
where it is assumed that },, fl· and ef are continuous. Writing sk=- U s~ in 
(190.5)1 and substituting the result into (298.18) yields 
(J. + fl) nms,. nk + flSk = 0. 
Taking the scalar product of this equation by n, we have 
(A + 2fl) nmsm = 0. 
(298.19) 
(298.20) 
It is a consequence of (298.17) that in order for }. + 2fl = 0 to hold, it is necessary and sufficient that 2 = 0 and fl = 0. Hence by (298.20) we conclude that 
in a viscous fluid nm sm = 0. Putting this result back into (298.19) yields fl sk = 0, 
and hence sk = 0. What has been proved 2 is that the instantaneous existence of 
1 DuHEM [1901, 7, Part I, Chap. 1, § 3], STOKES [Note, pp. 136-137 of the 1901 reprint 
of [1851, 2]]. 2 KorcHINE [1926, 3, § 3]. but the result is really included in an earlier one of DUHEM 
[1901, 7, Part II, Chap. III], who uses a different terminology. 
720 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 299. 
a surface upon which x and p are continuous but ik,m suffers a jump discontinuity 
is incompatible with the law oflinear viscosity (298.5). 
We recall that kinematical analysis alone (Sect. 190) shows that a discontinuity in ik m in order to persist must be propagated as an acceleration wave. 
In Sect. 29l we showed that acceleration waves are propagated in a barotropic 
flow of a perfect fluid at the speed c, determined by the barotropic relation p = f (e). 
Any thermal conductivity, however small, generally renders the flow baroclinic 
and results in the Newtonian speed of propagation (297.16) instead of the Laplacian speed (297.13) that holds when there is a non-degenerate equation of 
state p =P (e, 'YJ) and when there is neither flux nor supply of energy. Now we 
have seen that in fluid with non-vanishing viscosity, however small, such a surface 
cannot exist at even at a single instant. This last result is included in a general 
theorem of DuHEM1 : In a linearly viscous fluid, no waves of order greater than 1 
are possible. 
Since viscous and thermally conducting fluids are regarded as a refined model, 
superior to the perfect fluid, for the same physical materials, a device must be 
found whereby wave propagation in some sort may occur. Moreover, perfect 
fluids are formally a special case of viscous fluids; thus, properties of perfect fluids 
must be reflected in corresponding properties of viscous fluids. The appropriate 
device is the quasi-wave of DuHEM, a thin layer in which some of the variables 
suffer rapid but nevertheless continuous changes. The solutions containing waves 
that occur in perfect fluids are to be regarded as limit cases of an appropriate 
solution of "the same" problern for viscous fluids, in the limit as ;., f-l, and " 
approach 0, and hence the layer becomes arbitrarily thin. The rate at which 
x-+0, relative to those at which A-+0 and p-+0, influences the results. A full 
analysis of the plane quasi-wave has been given by GILBARG (1951) 2• 
A similar difficulty arises in connection with the boundary conditions. For 
viscous fluids it is customary to impose the condition (69.3) representing adherence 
of the fluid to the boundary. For perfect fluids, solutions satisfying this condition 
generally fail to exist, and only the weaker condition (69.1) is employed. In many 
cases the solutions afforded by the two theories are sensibly the same throughout 
most of the region occupied by the fluid but differ only in a thin boundary layer 
near solid objects. The existence ofthissmall region of difference, while perhaps 
effecting little alteration of the gross appearance of the flow, can yield results 
which are dynamically of a different kind; e.g., the force exerted by the fluid 
on an obstacle will generally be very different, as is plain from the results given 
in Sect. 202. 
The purpose of the foregoing remarks is to point up a major instance of the 
ideas sketched in the second paragraph of Sect. 5. 
299. Non-linearly viscous fluids. A simple and now familiar theory of nonlinear viscosity is obtained by taking (298.2), but without the restriction that f 
be linear, as the definition of a fluid. The analysis at the beginning of Sect. 298 
made no use of the linearity of f; thus it follows, in full generality, that (298.2) 
must reduce to a form giving t as an isotropic function of d. By the representation 
theorem for such functions we thus ha ve 
(299.1) 
1 [1901, 6] [1901, 7, Part II, Chap. 111]. DuHEM asserted also that shock waves arenot 
possible in a viscous fluid, but this result holds only subject to some qualification. Cf. Sect. 54 
of the article by SERRIN, Mathematical Principles of Classical Fluid Mechanics, this Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII, Part 1. 
2 For an exposition, see § 57 of SERRIN's article, just cited. 
Sect. 299. Non-linearly viscous fluids. 721 
where 
N0 (0,0,0) =0. (299.2) 
This reduction was first given by REINER1. In an incompressible fluid, there is 
no loss in generality in taking N0 = 0. The scalar coefficient functions generalize 
the classical viscosities occuring in the linear law (298.5). If we set 2p, = N1 (0, 0, 0) 
and ). = 8N0j(:Hd when d =0, then (298.5) results from (299.1) by linearization. 
The coefficient N2 , the cross-viscosity, gives rise to effects of a type not present 
in the linear theory. 
For the dimensional analysis, we may proceed just as in Sect. 298, but instead 
we prefer to replace (298.6) by the more general defining equation 
t = f(x, w, d, p, fJ, fJ0 , p,0 , to) 
where t0 , the natural time, is a material constant such that 
(299.3) 
phys. dim. t0 = [T] . (299.4) 
Use of the principle of material indifference and the n:-theorem reduces (299.3) 
to the form2 
(299.5) 
where, as shown already, the dimensionless function g is an isotropic function of 
its first argument. Thus in (299.1) the coefficients have the more explicit forms 
Nr = f!:'!_ • t[- 1 !:lr, (F unsummed) } lo 
!:lr = fr(to Id, t~ Ild, tg IIId, to Plflo, fJ!fJo), 
(299.6) 
where the functions f r are dimensionless functions of their five dimensionless 
scalar arguments. 
When the definition of a fluid is narrowed, as it was in Sect. 298, so as to 
exclude the time constant t0 , the forms (299.6) must be replaced by others, as 
follows 3 : 
Nr=P ( p, ; )r-1 !Ir, l 
( f.lo ,u~ p,~ ) !Ir= Ir p Id, -:p2 Ild, pa IIId, ()J()o · 
(299.7) 
The theory based upon (299.7) is easily seentobe a special case ofthat based 
upon (299.6). The specialization, however, is one of consequence. The theory 
devoid of a time constant is nearer to the classicallinear theory in that it possesses 
no more dimensionally independent material constants. A possible parameter 
governing dynamical similarity is the truncation number ], given by 4 
(299.8) 
1 [1945, 5, § 4]; cf. the treatment of the incompressible case by RrVLIN [1947, 13] [1948, 
24]. A simple rigorous proof is given in Sect. 59 of the article by SERRIN, just cited. 2 TRUESDELL [1950, 32, § 11] [1952, 21, §§ 68-69] [1952, 22, PP· 89-90]. 3 TRUESDELL [1949, 33, § 4] [1950, 32, § 5], "Stokesian fluid". 4 TRUESDELL [1949, 33, § 7] [1950, 32, § 8]. lt was stated erroneously by TRUESDELL 
that ] must be controlled independently of the classical scaling parameters. In fact, in two 
geometrically similar flows having the same Euler and Reynolds numbers the two truncation 
numbers (299.8) are necessarily also the same. The only further scaling parameters required 
for Stokesian non-linear viscosity are such dimensionless material constants as are used to 
specify the functions fr in (299.7). No such remark applies to (299.9). 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 46 
722 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 300. 
A condition for approximating the constitutive relation (299.1), supposed differentiable with respect to d, by the linear relation (298.5), is 3J< 1; that is, the intensity of stretching (Sect. 83) shall be small in respect to the ratio of pressure 
to linear viscosity. While the parameter (299.8) may be introduced in the more 
general theory defined by (299.6), it does not suffice; for dynamical similarity 
it is necessary to control also a parametersuch as 
(299-9) 
The criterion for truncation is now that the product of the intensity of stretching 
by the natural time of the fluid shall be small. The difference between the two 
theories is reflected even in the linear case, for in the theory based upon (299.7) 
the linear viscosities Ä. and ll• as we have seen in Sect. 298, are independent of the 
pressure, while in the theory based upon (299.6) this need not be so, for they may 
depend upon to Pl!lo. Further, it can be shown that the stress of the "Stokesian" 
theory is of a type that occurs also in results following from the kinetic theory 
of monatomic gases, while the more general theory based upon (299.6) is generally 
in contradiction with the kinetic theory, in which there is no time constantl. 
A summary of existing knowledge of the theories of non-linear viscosity is 
given in "The Non-linear Field Theories of Mechanics ", Vol. VIII, Part 2 of this 
Encyclopedia. 
300. Perfectly plastic bodies. The theory of perfectly plastic bodies is intended 
to describe an elastic rather than viscous flow in response to stretching and hence, 
while adopting the constitutive relation (298.3), relinquishes the requirement of 
consistency with (298.1). Thus we have at once in the linear case 2 
t!.=J.d~<5~+2!ld~. (300.1) 
but Ä. and !l are not material constants, being rather functions of d to be determined by additional conditions. 
Writing (300.1) in terms of the deviators oft and d (cf. App. 38.12), we have 
\ 
-3P=IXIc~. 1X=3.1.+21l·} 
0t = 2/.l 0d. (300.2) 
The additional conditions imposed as an essential part of the theory are (1) the 
mean pressure is a function of the dilatation only, and (2) some scalar invariant 
of 0t vanishes. These conditions are said to represent plastic flow or yield. The 
first amounts to replacing (300.2)1 by a general relation f (p, Ic~) = 0 and is a law 
of compressibility. Often it is replaced by the condition of incompressibility, 
Id = 0; in this case p becomes an additional unknown function. The second, 
characteristic of the theory, may be put in the form 
y ( II,!_ III,!) = O az ' a3 ' (300.3) 
where a is an elastic modulus called the yield stress of the material and where 
the yield function Y is dimensionless. This condition represents a material which 
responds, or at least responds in the manner indicated by (300.2), only when 
stresses of a certain kind reach an appropriately !arge value, while the state of 
plastic flow is assumed such as to maintain this value unaltered. 
1 The "relaxation time" in a Maxwellian gas is notamaterial constant such as t0 , being 
in fact p.fp, a function of temperature and pressure. 2 CAUCHY [1823, 1] [1828, 2, § III, Eqs. (95), (96)] gave these formulae as appropriate 
for a "soft" body but stated that Ä and p. are constants. 
Sect. 301. Linearly elastic bodies. 723 
A more general theory for incompressible substances1 is obtained by replacing 
(300.2) by a relation of the form 
2u dk = Y~ (300.4) r m ot'k'' 
where the dimensionless plastic potential P(tfa) is subject to the condition 
~k aP _ ) Um ot'k' -0, (300.5 
so that (300.4) is consistent with the condition of incompressibility, Id = 0. For 
isotropic materials, P is taken as a function of II,1/a2 and III,1/a3 only. 
While (300.4) might seem to determine d uniquely when t is known, this is 
not so. Indeed, t-tdfa is so determined; conversely, if Pis a sufficiently smooth 
function, tja is determined as a function of f-t dfa. Substituting this function into 
the yield condition (300.3), in the isotropic case we obtain a functional relation 
of the form 
t(~: nd, ~: IIId) = o. (300.6) 
Assuming this can be solved for t-tfa, we see that 
= (J t ( yliid ) . 
t-t Vnd Vnd (300.7) 
Thus the factor f-t occuring in (300.4) is determined, not assignable. 
Comparing a formula of the type (300.4), f-t being eliminated by means of 
(300.7), with the relation (299.1) for a non-linearly viscous fluid, we see that 
a still more general theory of perfectly soft bodies, including both viscous fluids 
and perfectly plastic bodJ.es, results by allowing the coefficients N0 , N1 , and N2 
to be discontinuous at d = 0 and by leaving the physical dimensions of the moduli 
unrestricted. The principal difference between the theories of viscosity and plasticity arises from the different physical dimensions of the material constants. 
While A. and f-t are viscosities, having the dimension [M L -1 r-1], a is a stress 
or elasticity, so that phys. dim a = [M L -1 r-2]. 
The theory of perfectly plastic bodies, as defined by (300.2h and (300.3), 
is due to ST. VENANT, LEVY, and v. MISES 2• The most commonly employed 
yield condition is that of MAXWELL and v. MISES 3, viz., II,t =K a2, where K 
is a constant (cf. the alternative forms of II,t given in Sect. App. 38); this amounts 
to taking f = const in (300.7). In this theory P = Y. 
As appears at once by confronting (300.1) with CAUCHY's first law (205.2), 
the theory of perfectly plastic bodies is a dynamical theory. Nevertheless, almost 
all of its large Iiterature treats it as if it were statical. Thus, as far as the exact 
theory is concerned, very little is known regarding it. A survey of the mathematical developments as practised by current specialists in the field is given in 
the article by FREUDENTHAL and GEIRINGER in Vol. VI of this Encyclopedia. 
301. Linearly elastic bodies. The simplest kind of elastic or springy body 
is one such that the stress arises solely in response to such change of shape as the 
body has undergone from its "natural" or unstressed state. Considering the strain 
tobe very small, by the results in Sect. 57 we may take the tensor e as a measure 
of it, and we assume the stress depends linearly upon it. Moreover, t = o if e = o. 
1 GEIRINGER [1953, 11, § 3]. 2 [1870, 7]; [1870, J]; [1913, 6]. 3 [1937. 5, pp. 32-33] (written in 1856), [1913. 6, §§ 2-3]. 
46* 
724 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 301. 
There results the constitutive equation 
t"'k = CkmPq epq• CkmPq = Cmkpq = Ckmqp, (301.1) 
where for simpler writing we have dropped the tilde from e. A linearly elastic 
body is isotropic if the relation (301.1) is an isotropic one. For an isotropic body, 
(301.1) reduces to Cauchy's lawl: 
(301.2) 
To the extent that e is an approximate measure of the mutual distances of 
particles, the principle of material indifference is satisfied by (301.1) and (301.2). 
If (57.1) is interpreted strictly, however, the principle of material indifference is 
violated, although (301.1) and (301.2) areinvariant under infinitesimal rigid timeindependent displacements. Linear elasticity theory does not represent exactly the 
kind of behavior possible in any real material. Rather, it is to be regarded as a 
mathematical approximation to the properly invariant theories described in the 
two following sections. 
The elasticities Ä., f.l, and CkmPq in (301.1) and (301.2) arematerial constants 
or functions of the temperature or entropy; their physical dimensions are those 
of stress, [M L -l r-2], and they bear no physical connection with the mathematically analogous viscosities appearing in (298.5). The static theory isalinear one: 
Uniformly doubled displacements always result from uniformly doubled loads, 
and, more generally, from displacements u', u" corresponding to stresses t', t", 
assigned forces j', f", and assigned surface loads t{n)• t(~) we may construct a 
displacement u=u'-u" answering to the stress t=t'-t", forcef=f'-f", 
and surface load t(nl =t'<nl- t(~l. 
A more restricted concept of elasticity was proposed by GREEN 2 : The work 
rlone by the stress in a rleformation rlepenrls only upon the strain anrl is recoverable 
work. The former part of the assertion may be expressed thus: 
i t!, e!, = L'(e), (301.3) 
the function .E being the stored energy. The latter part may be used to derive a 
special case of (301.1), but we defer the argument until the next section, where 
a more general definition is considered. Here we simply combine (301.1) and 
(301. 3), obtaining 
.E = t Ck ,,.Pq e~ er = t Gk ".Pq e~ er, (301.4) 
where 
Gk mq=2 p - 1 (Ck mq p + CP k ) qm• (301.5) 
Hence 
(301.6) 
Thus GREEN's theory allows but the 21 independent elasticities Gk".Pq in place 
of the 36 independent elasticities Ck".Pq of CAUCHY's theory. In GREEN's theory 
we have two alternative ways of defining isotropy: either in the same way as in 
CAUCHY's theory, or by requiring that L' be a scalar invariant of e. By the 
1 Eqs. (301.1) and (301.2) are commonly referred to as "HooKE's law". After a long prior 
history in very special cases, (301.2) with J. = p, was derived from a molecular model by 
NAVIER [1823, 3] [1827, 7]; more generally, by PozssoN [1829, 5, § 7]. The basic ideas of 
the continuum theory were constructed in 1821, the year of NAVIER's earliest work, by 
FRESNEL [1866, 4, pp. LXXVIII-LXXXI]. The general continuum theory is due to CAuCHY [1823, 1] [1828, 2, Eqs. (67), (70)] [1829, 4, Eqs. (7), (8)] [1830, 1]. Cf. also POISSON 
[1831, 2, ~ 23, Eq. (10)]. 2 [1839, 1, p. 249] [1841, 2, pp. 295-296]. Some special cases were known long before. 
Sect. 301. Linearly elastic bodies. 725 
representation theorem for isotropic scalar functions, we see that both definitions 
yield the same result, viz., 
1: = t (Ä + 2p) I~- 2p IIe, (301.7) 
and hence for isotropic bodies Green's and Cauchy's definitions of elasticity Iead to 
the same theory. 
We shall call hyperelastic a body answering to GREEN's theory, based upon 
the use of 1: as a stress potential according to (301.6) 2 ; this theory allows some 
remarkable deductions. 
First we establish the uniqueness of solution1 to boundary-value problems 
of equilibrium where the stress vector and the displacement are prescribed upon 
disjoint surfaces j 1 and j 2 , respectively, suchthat the closure of j 1 +<1 2 is the 
complete boundary of a finite body z>. Consider two solutions u' and u" corresponding to the same assigned loads and boundary values. Form a solution 
u = u'- u" as indicated above; for this solution we have f = 0 in z>, t(n) = 0 
on j 1 , and u =0 on j 2 • Substitution of (301.6) 2 into CAUCHY's first law (205.2) 
yields 
(;~L=o. (301.8) 
Hence 
0 = J um (8 -:) dv = J [(um~-:) -um k _o-:] dv, öek ,k öek ,k • öek U V 
(301.9) 
V 
=-2JI:dv, 
V 
where we have used EuLER's theorem on homogeneaus functions as well as the 
fact that on <1 either u or t(n) vanishes. Now if J:(e) is of one sign for all values 
of e, it follows from (301.9) that L'=O in z>. Looking back at (301.4), we see that 
if 1: is a definite quadratic form ( whether positive or negative), the generat boundaryvalue Problem of static linear hyperelasticity cannot have two distinct solutions. 
What has been proved is that e = 0; the strains is thus unique, and from the 
results in Sect. 57 it follows that the displacement u is determined uniquely to 
within an infinitesimal rigid displacement. This degree of indeterminacy is inherent in the linear theory of elasticity and is to be understood in all statements concerning it, except in cases where this indeterminacy is removed by 
specification of the displacement on the boundary. 
There is physical reason to require that }; be a positive definite form, for then 
in any given small strain from an unstressed state, the stress must do positive 
work. This idea seems tobe related to, but is not identical with, the requirement 
(258.1) 1 following from the entropy inequality, which is expressed rigorously 
in terms of time rates rather than displacements. In the isotropic case, 1: is 
positive definite if and only if 
f-l > 0, 3 Ä + 2J.l > 0. (301.10) 
There is a remarkable principle enabling us, in the case of equilibrium subject 
to given surface displacements and vanishing assigned force in the interior, to 
select among all kinematically possible deformations that one which is consistent 
with the theory of hyperelasticity, a positive definite stored energy function 
1 KIRCHHOFF [1859, 2, § 1] [1876, 2, Vor!. 27, § 2]. 
726 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 301. 
being assigned 1 : The displacement that satisfies the equations of equilibrium 
as well as the conditions at the bounding surface yields a smaller value for the total 
stored energy than does any other displacement satisfying the same conditions at the 
bounding surface. 
To prove this theorem, we writl~ e for the strain leading to a stressthat satisfies the conditions of equilibrium, and e + e' for some other strain, where it is 
assumed that u' =0 on the boundary 11. Then 
J .E(e + e') dv = J .E(e) dv + J (e'ZO a~~ej__ + .E(e')) dv, (301.11) 
since .E(e) isahomogeneaus quadratic form in the components e!,. Now 
J •m aE(e) d J , tkmd 
e k aezo V= U(k,m) V, 
" " 
(301.12) 
= ~ u_; tf .. ) da = 0, 4 
where we have used (301.6) and (205.2) and the fact that u' =0 on 11. Substitution 
of (301.12) into (301.11) yields 
J .E(e + e') dv = J .E(e) dv + J .E(e') dv. (301.13) 
This identity shows that the energy stored by a deformation corresponding 
to the vector sum of two displacements, one of which leads to an equilibrated 
elastic stress and both of which have the same values on the boundary, is the sum 
of the energies of the constituent displacements. Since the stored energy is 
assumed to be a positive definite form, the above-stated theorem of minimum 
energy follows immediately. 
The two theorems just proved are representative of the many that are known 2 
in this classical subject, the theory of which has been brought to a state of analytical completeness second only to that of the theory of the potential 3• 
Having given some consideration to static theorems, we turn now to the pro· 
pagation of waves. 
For a body of continuous constant elasticity C, putting (301.1h into (205.2) 
yields 
(301.14) 
where we have supposed ef tobe continuous. In linear· elasticity theory we have 
[up,q,J =g~ g~ [xp,apl· By applying the general identities (190.1) and (190.2) 
for an acceleration wave, when the present configuration is taken as the initia1 
one, from (301.14) we thus obtain 
or 
(301.15) 
(301.16) 
1 KELVIN [1863, 2, § 62] took the assertion as "the elementary condition of stable equilibrium"; in this sense, that of a postulated variational principle, its history may be traced 
back to an idea of DANIEL BERNOULLI in respect to elastic bands (1738). As a proved theorem 
of linear three-dimensional elasticity, it seems first to have been given by LovE [1906, 5, 
§ 119]. 
2 A masterly exposition of some of them is given by LovE [1927, 6, Chap. VII]. 3 Despite this fact, there exists no general exposition of the theory from a rigorous mathematical standpoint. 
Sect. 302. The rotationally elastic aether. 727 
Thus in order for an acceleration wave with normal n to exist and propagate, 
the jump s which it carries must be a proper vector of Ck mpqnqnm corresponding 
to the proper number e U2• For a body such that the work of the stress in any 
deformation is positive, as is the case for a hyperelastic body with positive definite stored energy, the tensor C k mpq nq nm is positive definite, its quadric being called 
Fresnel's ellipsoid for the direction n; therefore allproper numbers e U2 are positive, and therefore all possible speeds U are real. In the general case, then, 
in any linearly elastic body such that the work of the stress is positive for arbitrary 
deformations, a wave with given normal n may carry a discontinuity of the acceleration parallel to any one of three uniquely determined, mutually orthogonal directions, 
and corresponding to each of these directions there is a speed of Propagation determined uniquely by the elasticities of the material and by n. 
When the proper numbers e U2 are not distinct, the above conclusion must 
be modified, as is seen most easily by considering the isotropic case, for then 
(301.14) assumes the more special form 
[exk] = (J. +,u)[u~pk] +,u[ui.~p]. (301.17) 
so that for an acceleration wave we have 
{301.18) 
specializing (301.15). Taking the scalar and vector products of this equation 
by n yields 
{e U2 - (J. + 2,u)} s · n = o, } 
{e U2 - ,u} s x n = o. (301.19) 
If s . n =f= 0, the first equation yields e U2 = J. + 2,u, and the second, if we exclude 
the case when J. + ,u = 0, yields s X n = 0. If s · n = 0 but s X n =f= 0, the second 
equation yields e U2 =,u. Summarizing these results, we see that in an isotropic 
linearly elastic body for which A + ,u =f= 0, a necessary and sufficient condition that 
acceleration waves be propagated at positive speeds is A +2,u >0, ,u >O. This 
condition is satisfied when the stored energy is positive definite. Two kinds of 
acceleration waves are possible: longitudinal waves, whose speed of propagation is 
given by 
and transverse waves, for which 
U2 = Jl-.. 
e 
(301.20) 
(301.21) 
In view of the kinematical interpretation furnished by HADAMARD's theorem in 
Sect.190, the longitudinal waves are called expansion waves or irrotational waves, 
while the transverse waves are called equivoluminal waves or shear waves. The 
foregoing results, which are due to CHRISTOFFEL and HUGONIOT1, illustrate the 
far-reaching effect of isotropy: instead of three speeds of propagation, for an 
isotropic body there are only two, but instead of there being only three possible 
directions for the discontinuity, there are infinitely many, though the possible 
directions are still far from arbitrary. 
302. The rotationally elastic aether. The quest for a mechanical theory of light 
as a vibration of an elastic medium attracted the attention of many of the 
1 CHRISTOFFEL [1877, 3] obtained really all of the above results and more, but he did 
not present them very clearly, nor did he recognize as such the isotropic case, for which 
HuGONIOT [1886, 3] gave a very simple treatment. Our proof is essentially that of HADAMARD [ 1903, 11, ~~ 260, 267- 268] and DuHEM [ 1904, 1, Part IV, Chap. I, § V]. 
728 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 302. 
illustrious physicists of the nineteenth century1• The most successful of these 
mechanical theories as applied to the deduction of the laws of transmission, 
reflection, and refraction of light in transparent media was devised by MAcCuLLAGH in 1839 2• Some thirty years after the publication of MAcCULLAGH's theory, 
FITZGERALD 3 applied the new electromagnetic theory of MAXWELL to derive 
the laws of reflection and refraction of light at the interface between two dissimilar 
dielectric media. In this memoir, FITZGERALD called attention to the formal 
analogy between the equations of the new theory and the old equations of 
MAcCuLLAGH's theory. This seems remarkable, for the physical ideas underlying 
the two theories are totally different. The constitutive equations of MAcCuLLAGH'S "rotationally elastic aether" do not conform to the principle of material 
indifference known to be satisfied by ordinary elastic materials. In all other 
regards, however, the theory is based on the usual equations of mechanics, 
specialized somewhat by linearization. 
a.) MacCullagh's equations and boundary conditions. As a starting point we 
consider the equations of motion (205.2) and boundary conditions (205.5) at a 
stationary surface of discontinuity which is not a shock: 
(302.1) 
Now contrary to the theory of ordinary elastic materials, where the stress arises 
solely in response to changes in shape, MAcCULLAGH supposed the aether to be 
a medium in which the stress, while completely insensitive to changes in shape, arises 
only in response to rotations about its relaxed state. This implies the existence 
of a preferred dass of reference frames. We may regard these preferred frames 
as the inertial frames of classical mechanics. The aether in its relaxed state will 
be at rest or in uniform translatory motion with respect to one of these frames. 
Let uk(~. t) denote the displacement vector of the medium taken in this sense. 
Then the quantities 
w .. = U[, s] = -l (u, s- U5 ,) ' ' ' (302.2) 
measure an infinitesimal rotation of the medium (cf. Sect. 57). Thus MAcCULLAGH 
assumed that for small rotations of the aether medium the stress is given by 
(302.3) 
Although MAcCULLAGH considered the more difficult case of crystalline media, 
we shall here treat only the isotropic case, where A••Pq is an isotropic tensor. 
It follows that, in this case, the relations (302.3) reducc to 
t, 5 = Kw, 5 • (302.4) 
The constant K is the gyrostatic rigidity. The aether is assumed to pervade all 
ordinary material media and to have the same density ein all materials. However, 
the gyrostatic rigidity of the aether is assumed to have a different value in materials 
with different indices of refraction. Thus at the interface between two dissimilar 
isotropic media ofthissimple type we have [e] =0, [K] =1=0. Moreover, at such 
an interface, the displacement u is assumed continuous, [u] =0. Thus it follows 
from the results of Sect. 175 that if u is differentiable in each of the adjoining 
media with differentiable limit values for aujat and grad u on each side of the 
1 WHITTAKER [1951, 39] has given us a detailed and fascinating account of the evolution 
of these theories and their interrelations. 2 [1848, 1]. 3 [1880, 8]. 
Sect. 302. The rotationally elastic aether. 729 
interface, then 
[ ~7] = 0, [curl u]. n = 0. (302.5) 
Substituting the constitutive relation (302.4) into (302.1), linearizing the acceleration with respect to u and its derivatives, and collecting our assumptions thus 
far, we have 
K curlcurl u + e a;;- = o, I 
[K curl u] xn = o, (302.6) 
[e ~] =0, [curlu] ·n =0. 
These are the basic equations of MAcCULLAGH's theory of light. 
ß) Fitzgerald's analogy. MAXWELL's constitutive equations for a non-magnetic, 
linear, rigid, homogeneous, isotropic stationary dielectric were discussed briefly 
in Sect. 283 and are treated in detail in Sect. 308. For such media we have 
~=eE, l "= ~B (302.7) 
'!I' /1-o ' 
where the dielectric constant e is a measure of the ease of electric polarization 
of the medium. If we substitute these relations into the general electromagnetic 
equations (278.2), (278.3), (278.8), (278.9), and (283.42) to (283.45), we obtain 
the system aB 
curlE + -ät = 0, div B = 0, ) (
302_8) 
[E]Xn=O, [B] =0, [eE]·n=O, 
1 aE - - curl B - e- = 0 div E = 0. 
/1-o ot ' (302.9) 
These equations, generalized to the case of crystalline media, formed the basis 
of FrTZGERALD's derivation of the laws of reflection and refraction of light from 
the Maxwell theory. We see that, leaving aside the question of physical interpretation of the symbols, if we make the substitutions 
Kcurlu~oc.E, e ~7 ~oc.B, ) (302.10) 
K ~ßfe, (! ~ßfto• 
in (302.6), we obtain (302.8) and (302.9). The quantities cx and ß in (302.10) are 
arbitrary non-vanishing constants. The last two Maxwell equations (302.9) are 
a consequence of the identities div curl u = 0, curl ~ - -fft curl u = o. This 
mathematical equivalence between the electromagnetic equations in ideal media 
characterized by the constitutive equations (302.7) and MAcCuLLAGH's equations 
was first perceived by FrTZGERALD1• 
As remarked by WHITTAKER2, " ••• there can be no doubt that MAcCuLLAGH 
really solved the problern of devising a medium whose vibrations, calculated 
1 [1880, 8]. The analogy between MAcCuLLAGH's equations and MAXWELL's equations 
based on the replacements (302.10) is discussed briefly by SoMMERFELD in his lectures [1947. 
14]. He also considers a second set of replacements which renders the equations equivalent. 
HEAVISIDE [1893. 4, Chap. 111] gives an elaborate account of electro-mechanical analogies 
based on the Maxwell equations of dielectrics, conductors, etc., and the mechanical equations 
of elastic solids, viscous fluids, etc. 2 [1951. 39, p. 144]. 
730 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 303. 
in accordance with the correct laws of dynamics, should have the same properties 
as the vibrations of light". 
303. Finitely elastic bodies. The classical theory of finite elastic strain generalizes the concepts of linear elasticity by considering a body in which the 
stress arises solely in response to the difference of the present shape from that 
in an unstressed "natural state". An apparently still more general notion is 
included in the constitutive equation 
tkm = fkm(X'L,a.), {303.1) 
where X'l,a.=oxqjoXa. and where ~=~(X) is the deformation from the natural 
state to the present configuration. The prominence of the natural state is extreme: 
neither any intermediate state nor any event in the stress and strain history 
need be considered in ascertaining the stress. We may say that the body exhibits 
a perfect memory of its natural state and is entirely oblivious to every other 
except the present one. 
The principle of material indifference (Sect. 293 0) makes it possible to reduce 
(303.1) to the form1 
T=f(C), (303.2) 
where C is the deformation tensor defined by (26.2) and where T is ProLA's 
stress tensor, connected with t through {210.9). 
Although both C and T transform as double tensors under time-independent 
changes of material and spatial co-ordinates, they do not transform as tensors 
under change of frame. Thus the principle of material indifference does not 
force the relation {303.2) tobe an isotropic one; indeed, any relation of the form 
(303.2) satisfies that principle. Herein lies the explanation of why the classical 
theory of elasticity includes anisotropic as weil as isotropic behavior, in contrast 
to the theories of fluids described in Sects. 298 and 299. 
An elastic body is isotropic if (303.2) reduces to an isotropic relation. The 
principles given in Sect. 32 suffice to show that in this case, alternatively, t 
may be regarded as an isotropic function of c, allowing a statement of the law 
of elasticity in terms of spatial tensors only2 : 
t = N0 1 + N1 c + N2 c2 
(303-3) 
where the coefficients Nr and !:l.r are scalar functions of c, and hence may be 
taken as functions of Ic, Ilc, IIIc or as functions of Ic, Ic-1 and IIIc or IIIc-1, etc. 
Thus far we have followed CAUCHY's concept of elasticity. GREEN's concept, 
which may be stated exactly as in Sect. 301, Ieads to a more restricted theory, 
as we shall see now. The basic assumption of finite hyperelasticity is that there 
exists a stored energy E, a scalar function of the material co-ordinates X and 
of the deformation gradients x". a., such that all the work of the stress is recoverable. We have then, by hypothesis, 
JLi=t"md !!o km• (303.4) 
where the inessential factor eleo is added for conformity with standard usage. 
The principle of material indifference requires that in fact E = E (X, C). A classical argument, which has been given in three different forms in Sects. 218, 232A, 
1 NoLL [1955. 18, § 15a]. A weaker theorem had been proved under stronger hypotheses 
by earlier writers. 
2 REINER [1948, 23, §§ 1-2]. 
Sect. 304. Hypo-elasticity. 
and 256A, enables us to conclude thatl 
T,cx- ol: 
"'- ax"' • ,cx 
etc. These stress-strain relations furnish a special case of (303.2). 
731 
(303.5) 
Within hyperelasticity, a body is isotropic if its stored energy is an isotropic 
function of C. From the fundamentallemma in Sect. 30, it follows that, alternatively, 1: =l:(c) =l:(Ic-'• Ilc-'• Illc-,)· It is easy to show by using (App. 38.16) 
that for isotropic bodies any one of Eqs. (303.5) reduces to the form given by 
FINGER2 : 
t!, = ~: [ (nc-, a:~_, + Illc-' 81~~-~) <5!, + ) 
a.1: -1,. al: ,. ] + 8Ic-' Cm- Illc-, olle-' cm • 
(303.6) 
Equivalently, the principal axes of stress coincide with the principal axes of 
strain at z, and the principal stresses ta are related to the principal stretches Äa 
as follows 3 : 
a =1,2,3. (303.7) 
The definition (303.1) is incomplete in that the dimensional moduli are not 
specified; it should be amplified to read 
where 
phys. dim. p. = [M L -1 r-z]. 
(303.8) 
(303.9) 
Thus, as in the theory of perfectly plastic solids, there is but a single independent 
dimensional material constant, and it has the dimensions of stress. By the 
n-theorem we see at once that (303.8) must reduce to t"m/p. =h"m(xq,cx), and 
hence (303.2) may be replaced by 
T /i =g(C), (303.10) 
where g is dimensionless. Corresponding modifications are easily made in all 
equations of the theory. 
After a quiescence of half a century, the theory of finite elastic strain has 
undergone remarkable development in the past decade. See "The Non-linear 
Field Theories of Mechanics" in Vol. VIII, Part 2 of this Encyclopedia. 
304. Hypo-elasticity. A different generalization of the classicallinear theory 
of elasticity is obtained by regarding it as describing approximately a material 
not necessarily having any natural state but rather experiencing a stress increment 
arising in response to the rate of strain from the immediately preceding state. Thus 
no finite memory is ascribed to the material. From the results at the beginning 
of Sect. 95 it is plain that the appropriate tensor measuring the rate of strain is 
the stretching, d. From the principle of material indifference in Sect. 293 (} we 
see that one of the various time fluxes introduced in Sects. 149 to 151 may be used 
1 The argument is due in principle to GREEN [1839, 1, p. 249] [1841, 2, pp. 295-296] 
whose analysiswas corrected by KELVIN [1863, 2, §§ 51- 57]. All essential arguments occur 
in the treatment of a special case by KIRCHHOFF [1852, 1, pp. 770-772]. The many known 
equivalent forms are summarized by TRUESDELL [1952, 21, §§ 39-40]. 2 [1894, 4, Eq. (35)]. 3 KöTTER [1910, 6, § 1)], ALMANSI [1911, 1, § 7]. 
732 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 304. 
to measure the rate of stress in a properly invariant way, and that the constitutive equations must be sufficiently general as to render immaterial the choice 
of a particular flux. We select the co-rotational flux drtfdt as defined by (148.7); 
allowing the magnitude of the present stress t to moderate the response of the 
material to stretching, we write the constitutive equation in the form 
dtt = j(t, d, p,), (304.1) 
where f-l = const and 
phys. dim. f-l = [M L -1 7-2]. (304.2) 
This last requirement asserts that all material moduli shall be elasticities, just 
as in the theories of linear or finite elasticity or of perfectly plastic materials. 
Fluid behavior, to the extent that it is accompanied by effects of viscosity or 
relaxation, is thus explicitly and intentionally excluded. (Effects of temperature 
differences are easily taken into account if desired but are here omitted for 
simplicity.) 
Application of dimensional analysis shows that t may enter (304.1) only in 
the ratio lff-l and that f, assumed continuous at d =0, must be linear in d: 
drskm =KkmPqd skm:==tkmj2u, dt Pq• r (304.3) 
where K is a function of s. Since drsfdt and d are both tensors under change of 
frame (Sects. 144 and 148), K must alsobesuch a tensor; consequently K is an 
isotropic tensor function of s. By a representation theorem due to RIVLIN and 
ERICKSEN1 it follows that the most general constitutive equation satisfying the 
hypotheses (304.1) and (304.2) is 
where 
dt = N0 I.t 1 + N 1 d + N2 I.t s + N3 M 1 + l 
t + t N4 (d s + s d) + N5 I.t s 2 + N6 M s + 
+ N7N1+!N8 (ds2 +s2 d) +N9 Ms2 + 
+ N10 Ns + N11 Ns 2, 
M - s~ dk', N s~ srp dt 
Nr = Nr (18 , II8 , III8 ) F= 1, 2, ... 11. 
(304.4) 
(304.5) 
(304.6) 
The theory based upon these constitutive equations is called hypo-elasticity 2• 
In keeping with the expressed aim of elastic rather than viscous response, 
Eqs. (304.4) areinvariant under a change of the time scale. While the stress at a 
given time generally depends upon the manner in which the load has been applied 
during previous instants, it is thus independent of the actual speed of deformation. 
The exact theory is a fully dynamical one. However, Eqs. (304.4) reduce to those 
of the linear theory of elasticity (Sect. 301) under the assumptions usually made 
in formulating that theory. Moreover, every isotropic elastic body is also hypoelastic 3. This result, however, must not be regarded as reducing hypo-elasticity 
to elasticity, for the converse is generally false, and in particular the simpler 
special cases of (304.4) are not elastic cases. Finally, it has been shown that 
most of the common "incremental" theories of plasticity other than that of 
1 [1955, 21, §§ 40 and 33]. A result of the sameform had been deduced from a too restrictive definition by TRUESDELL [1951, 27, § 26]. 
2 TRUESDELL [1953, 32, §56 (revised)J [1955, 27 and 28]. 3 NoLL [1955, 18, § 15b]. 
Sect. 305. Visco-elastic and accumulative theories. 73.3 
perfectly plastic materials are included as special cases of hypo-elasticity, providing they be first corrected so as to satisfy the principle of material indifference1 . 
In much of the foregoing discussion, it has been assumed that the body is 
initially unstressed, but this assumption is not at all necessary in hypo-elasticity. 
Suppose that in an interval dt a body subject to initial stress s 0 undergoes a 
displacement having small gradients in the sense defined in Sect. 57. Then we 
have wk, dt R:j Rk, and dpq dt f'::j epq• where il and e are the tensors of infinitesimal 
rotation and strain for the displacement considered. Also skmdt R:j skm_ s~m. 
From (.304._3) and (148.7) we have then 
(.304.7) 
The essential content of these equations, which define a theory of small deformation of an initially stressed body, was given by CAUCHY 2• It reflects the fundamentally greater generality of hypo-elasticity in comparison to elasticity. While, 
as is plain from (303.6), the most general theory of finite elasticity is not capable 
of representing an elastically isotropic body which in its natural state suffers 
any but hydrostatic stress, in hypo-elasticity there is, in general, no natural 
state, and the stress at any given instant may be arbitrary. It was CAUCHY's 
theory of initially stressed bodies, a special case ofthat defined by (.304.7), that 
suggested the theory of hypo-elasticity. Hypo-elasticity may be regarded as a 
theory in which relations of CAUCHY's type are applied in each time interval dt. 
305. Visco-elastic and accumulative theories. Studies of elasticity and viscosity, according to the classical theories presented in Sects. 298 and .301, made 
it natural to attempt to combine the two kinds of phenomena within a single 
theory. Two ideas immediately present themselves: 
1. The total stress is the sum of an elastic stress arising from the strain and a 
viscous stress arising from the stretching, and 
2. The total rate of strain is the sum of an elastic rate arising from the rate of 
stressing and a viscous rate arising from the stress. 
Schematically, the two alternatives may be written 
t=f(e) +g(e) and e =h(t) +k(t). (305.1) 
Both imply necessarily the existence of material constants having the physical 
dimensions of elasticity and of viscosity; hence there is a modulus having the 
physical dimensions of time, and relaxation effects may be expected. The former 
alternative was proposed by 0.-E. MEYER, VoiGT, and DUHEM 3; the latter, by 
MAXWELL, NATANSON, and ZAREMBA 4. Theoriesofthis type, including generalizations obtained by allowing time derivatives up to arbitrarily high order to occur 
on the each side of (.3 0 5 .1 h or (3 0 5 .1) 2 , are called visco-elastic. If e is the infinitesimal strain tensor, the constitutive relations are 
n (o)k m ( 0 )k ~ Ak 8t t = J:o Bk 8t e, (305.2) 
1 GREEN [1956, 9 and 10]. Perfectly plastic·materials are included.formally by a limit 
process. 2 [1829, 4, Eqs. (36), (37)]. 3 [1874. 3 and 5] [1875, 4]; [1889, 10] [1892, 12 and 13] [1910, 10, §§ 395-396]; 
[1903, 6-9] [1904, 1, Part I, Chap. II, and Part IV, Chaps. II-III]. 4 [1867, 2, pp. 30-31]; [1901, 11-13] [1902, 7-9] [1903. 12-14]; [1903, 17-20] 
[1937. 12]. 
734 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 306. 
where the coefficients Ak and Bk are usually assumed constant. These theories 
possess a large recent literat~re, mostly in one-dimensional andjor linearized 
contexts. 
Such linear theories generally violate the principle of material indifference, 
as was first noticed by ZAREMBA, who was led to his form of the principle in 
this context. His is the only early attempt in viscoelasticity to yield a theory 
that is a mechanically possible one for unrestricted motions. 
A generaland properly invariant theory of the MEYER-VOIGT type, allowing 
the stress to depend upon the first spatial derivatives of the displacement and 
of the accelerations of all orders, has been achieved by RrvLIN and ERICKSEN1 . 
The Maxwell-Zaremba theory is generalized by NoLL's theory of hygrosteric 
materials 2, which are defined by (304.1) without requiring f to be linear in d, 
and by a more general theory sketched by CoTTER and RIVLIN 3• 
BoLTZMANN and VoLTERRA4 proposed a theory in which the stress is determined by the entire sequence of strains undergone by the body in the past. 
The material is represented as having a weaker memory for older experiences; 
the stress is obtained by integrating the strains from - oo to t, with a suitable 
damping or "memory" function. The linear theory, sometimes called "hereditary" but more fitly named accumulative, has a considerable literature. 
It is still more general to allow the stresstobe determined in any way by the 
strain history, i.e., 1 
t = F [x~cx], (305.3) -oo 
where F denotes a functional. This extremely general and natural concept of 
material behavior has been put into properly invariant from by NoLL5 and by 
GREEN, RrVLIN, and SPENCER6 (1956). The latter authors determined conditions 
under which the functional in (305.3) may be replaced by a sum of integrals of 
VüLTERRA's type or by a finite combination of time derivatives as in the theory of 
RrvLIN and ERICKSEN. NoLL's method, which rests directly upon properties 
of invariance as the definitions of particular materials, is presented in "The 
Non-linear Field Theories of Mechanics ", This Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII, Part 2. 
V. Examples of thermo-mechanical constitutive equations. 
306. Irreversible thermodynamics. While even the classical theory of isotropic viscous and thermally conducting fluids furnishes an example where both 
mechanical and energetic principles must be used in order to solve any definite 
problem, the constitutive equations themselves, namely, (296.1) and (298.5), 
embody separate principles, one being purely mechanical and the other, purely 
energetic. 
The various theories of "irreversible thermodynamics" attempt to describe 
the numerous physical phenomena which cannot be separated as belonging to 
one or the other category to the exclusion of the other. Such phenomena occur 
especially in heterogeneaus substances. Current practice concentrates upon the 
production of entropy owing to such interactions and supposes that the "affinities" and "fluxes" which enter into the production of entropy depend functionally, and usually linearly, upon one another. 
1 [1955. 21]. 2 [1955. 18, §§ 6-9]. 3 [1955. 4]. 4 [1874, 1]; [1909, 10 and 11] [1930, 9]. 5 [1957. 11] [1958, 8]. 
6 [1957. 6] [1959. 6]. 
Sect. 307. The "Maxwellian" fluid. 735 
In Sects. 257 and 259 we have explained the concepts in terms of which such 
theories are constructed. Since we do not consider that the problern of dynamical 
and energetic invariance is yet sufficiently understood, we rest content with 
citing expositians of the subject as it is currently received 1. 
307. The "Maxwellian" fluid. As our sole example of the use of the principle 
of equipresence (Sect. 29317), we mention a fully thermomechanical theory of 
fluids based on two constitutive assumptions: 
1. Both the stress and the flux of energy depend upon the spatial and temporal 
derivatives of the thermodynamic state and of the velocity, of all orders. 
2. The constitutive relations involve material coefficients having the physical 
dimensions of viscosity, thermal conductivity, and temperature, but no others. 
These constitutive relations define the M axwellian fluid of TRUESDELL 2• 
While this theory is known 3 to stand in need of revision so as to be rendered 
properly invariant, the general forms of the leading terms in the expansions of 
the stress and flux of energy in powers of the viscosity give an idea of what is tobe 
expected. From the first of the defining conditions, expressing an application 
of the principle of equipresence, it might be thought that the expansions for 
the stress t and flux of energy h would be very similar. However, the different 
tensorial characters of t and h, combined with requirements of dimensional 
invariance, force the the counterparts of terms present in the expansion of t to 
be absent from the expansion of h, and conversely. 
To avoid long formulae we summarize the forms of the terms of orders 0, 1, 2 
in words. The stress t is the sum of 
TL The terms in the linear law of fluid viscosity (298.5). 
T2. The quadratic viscous terms according to the theory of RIVLIN and 
ERICKSEN mentioned in Sect. 305. 
T}. The mostgenerallinear isotropic function of P,k P,m· 
T4. The mostgenerallinear isotropic tensor function of P,(k(),ml· 
T 5. The most generallinear isotropic tensor function of (), k (), m. 
T6. The mostgenerallinear isotropic tensor function of P,km· 
T7. The mostgenerallinear isotropic tensor function of O,km· 
Similarly, the flux of energy h is the sum of 
H 1. A linear term, 
where IX is dimensionless, and 
H 2. The most general linear isotropic vector function of 
P,k' e,m' and Xp,q. 
H3. The mostgenerallinear isotropic vector function of ip,q,. 
(307.1) 
It is most striking that in these results the separation of effects follows from 
considerations of invariance alone. For example, despite the much more general 
definition of a fluid used here, the linear terms T 1 in the stress are exactly the 
same as occur both in the classical linear theory and in the simpler non-linear 
1 PRIGOGINE [1947, 12], DE GROOT [1952, 3], J. MEIXNER and H. REIK in Vol. III, Part 2 
of this Encyclopedia. 
2 [1949, 34, §§ 2-4) [1951, 27, §§ 19-21). We have altered slightly TRUESDELL'S 
definition and results. 3 Cf. the remarks of TRUESDELL [1956, 13, § 16). 
736 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 308. 
"Stokesian" theory (Sect. 299). While FouRIER's law (296.4) is slightly generalized 
by (307.1), the added term is of a thermodynamic type, parallel to the classical 
thermal one, and in the linear approximation the effects of deformation cannot 
enter the constitutive equation for h. Similar, though more elaborate, separations 
of effects are seen in the quadratic terms T2 to T7 and H2 to H3. These quadratic terms allow for interactions of a definite, not arbitrary kind. 
Restrietions such as these, which follow from principles of invariance alone, 
are only now coming to be studied. 
VI. Electromagnetic constitutive equations. 
308. The Maxwellian dielectric. The problern of formulating constitutive 
equations for moving and deforming material media is one of the most difficult 
and controversial in electromagnetic theory. We shall illustrate some of the 
relevant ideas by treating a simple example. 
rx.) The Euclidean invariant constitutive equations of a Maxwellian dielectric. 
In classical electromagnetic theory as refined by LoRENTZ we have the aether 
relations (cf. Sect. 279), which can be written in the 4-dimensional tensorform 
r;nd = 1 ~ ( _ det y)~ yll'Fyde CfJ'I'e V~ 
or the 3-dimensional vector form 
H = _!_B. 
f.lo 
D =e0 E, 
(308.1) 
(308.2) 
According to the Lorentz point of view, these relations hold in all material media, 
moving or stationary, but it must be recalled that D and H are the charge and 
current potentials for the total charge including that due to polarization and 
magnetization of the material medium. 
We define the ideal material called a Maxwellian dielectric by the relations 
P=e0 xE, 
M=O 
X= const } (308.3) 
for the polarization P and the magnetization M, provided the medium is at 
rest in a Euclidean frame which is simultaneously a Lorentz frame. Recall that 
such a frame is one for which we have the canonical forms (cf. Sects. 280 and 152) 
_ 1= [<5rs 0 l = [<5rs 01 1 Y 0 _ ~ , g 0 0 , t = (0, 0, 0, 1), c2 =-. (308.4) ~ ~~ 
If we introduce the potential T= (~, ~) of free charge and current (cf. Sect. 283) 
in a polarizable and magnetizable medium, the constitutive relations (308.3) 
can be put in the 4-dimensional form 
(308.5) 
with 
-)(1 = [ 15,5 0 1' 
0 - Bflo 
e = e0 K, K = 1 +X (308.6) 
or in the 3-dimensional vector form 
~=eE, 1 ~=-B. f.lo (308.7) 
Sect. 308. The Maxwellian dielectric. 737 
To see how these relations are generalized to the case of moving media, it is 
easiest to employ the world tensor formalism of Sect. 152 as applied to the problern 
of constructing invariants of fields under the Euclidean group of transformations 
(rigid motions). It was noted in Sect.152 that if lJI"was a world tensor satisfying 
the conditions 
(308.8) 
then the non-vanishing components prs. · · in a Euclidean frame transform as a 
3-dimensional tensor under the group of Euclidean transformations. This special 
kind of world tensor was called a space tensor. Consider then the electromagnetic 
field cp and the world velocity vector v of a motion. In terms of these quantities 
we can define two associated space tensors 
(i;!.l = gD-1 f/J-1s vS' 
58!.1-1 =g!.I'Pg-1Sf/J'l'S· 
In a Euclidean frame we have (274.1), so that, in such a frame, 
i = (E + vxB, 0), !8 = (dualB, 0). 
(308.9} 
(308.10} 
(308.11) 
Consider next the polarization-magnetization world tensor :rt defined in (283.23). 
In terms of this tensor we defined the space tensors 1.)3!.1 and 9Jl!.l -1 called the world 
polarization and magnetization densities in (283.24) and (183.25). In a Euclidean 
frame we have 
!l3 = (P, 0), IJJl =(dual M, 0). (308.12) 
Therefore, the world tensor equations 
1.)3D = eo Vg X (i;!.l, 9JlDLI = 0, (308.13) 
reduce to (308.3) when the medium is at rest in a Euclidean frame. Moreover, 
since these equations involve only space tensors, they are rotationally invariant. 
Stated more explicitly, the proportionality of polarization and electromotive 
intensity and the vanishing of the magnetization are invariant conditions under 
the group of Euclidean transformations relating the dass of reference frames 
moving rigidly with respect to one another. Now from (283.33), (283.24), (283.25), 
(279.13), and the aether relations (308.1) we have 
yn.1 = "1!.1.1 _ ;n;D.1, 
= 'V*(-dety)![y!.l'~'y-1 q;'l'fJ- ~g-1'Pv!.lvSq;'Ps-J (308.14) 
- _K_gnSv-1v'P m ] c2 r'PS • 
or, in a frame for which we have the canonical forms (308.4), 
~ = e0 [E +X (E + v X B], l ~ = - 1 [B + ~ v X (E + v X B)]. 1-'o c 
(308.15) 
We have arrived at these constitutive equations for the potentials ~ and ~ 
by demanding that the relations between polarization and magnetization be 
invariant under the group of rigid (Euclidean) transformations. We are led 
to this idea of invariance by thinking of polarization and magnetization as 
quantities characteristic of the moving material medium and carried with it. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/t. 4 7 
738 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 308. 
Thus, on the basis of classical thought, any relation betwcen them and the electromagnetic field should be invariant under the group of rigid motions. This is an 
application of the principle of material indifference. 
We wish now to cantrast with the results (308.14) and (308.16) obtained by 
this classical procedure the corresponding results obtained by MINKOWSKI 1 , whose 
reasoning was guided by the idea of Lorentz invariance of the constitutive relations in moving media. 
ß) The Lorentz-invariant constitutive equations for a moving M axwellian 
dielectric. Suppose a Maxwellian dielectric is at rest in some Lorentz frame 
which, for our present purpose, we may imagine as coinciding with some 
Euclidean frame. Recall that the dass of Lorentz frames are those for which the 
tensor y has the canonical form (308.4)1 . Let us assume that, when the medium 
is at rest, it is characterized by the relations (308.5). Now suppose that such a 
medium is set into motion. Any selected particle of the medium undergoing 
the motion will be instantaneously at rest in some other Lorentz frame. MINKOWSKI reasoned that the relations (308.5) should hold in that Lorentz frame as 
a consequence of the correct constitutive equations for the moving medium. 
To put this idea into effect, let LD .1 be the coefficients of a Lorentz transformation 
( cf. Sect. 282), so that by definition we have 
-1 -1 LD.-1 L'~'e yL1e = yD'P. (308.16) 
Let wD be the relativistic velocity vector of the motion defined by 
c vD 
w0 == ~· , Yn.-1 wDw.-1 =- c2 , (308.17) - Y~e v~ve 
where, as before, v is the classical world velocity vector of thc motion. In the 
reference framein which the medium is moving we have 
w-( v 1 ) (308.18) - v1- ~ v1 - v2 • c2 c2 
We can choose the coefficients LD.-1 of a Lorentz transformation so that 
has the form 
w = (0, 0, 0, 1) 
(308.19) 
(308.20) 
at some selected event. If the medium is in uniform translatory motion, so that 
v =const, then w will have the form (308.20) throughout a space-time region, 
but, for general motions, we shall have (308.20) only at a single event. Let if'DL1 
and (jjDL1 denote the transformed components of r and Cf!· That is, 
if'DL1 =LD'PLL1e T'~'e, fPnA = L'Pn Le.-1 CfJ'Pe· (308.21) 
Thus, in the new coordinate system, MINKOWSKI assumes that 
-!J.-j_,;~( d t-)1-!JljF-Ltf')-
- V f.lo - e """ " CfJ'P&• (308.22) 
where x has rest values consistent with (308.6). Applying the inverse Lorentz -1 -1 
transformation LeA (LD.-1 LL1'P= bfl,) to (308.22) we see that the relation between 
I [1910, 7). 
Sect. 308. The Maxwellian dielectric. 
the unbarred components of r and gJ must be 
TQLJ = v-~- (- det x)~ XQ 'P xL1 e IP'Pe' 
flo 
where, for the moving medium, 
x!JLl = L~'PLLJ e x_'Pe. 
739 
(308.23) 
(308.24) 
To compute the values of the unbarred components x!JLl it is convenient to decompose x as follows: 
X,!JLl = yQLl- f-lo (e- eo) w!J wLl' l 
=yQLl _ Lw!JwLl. 
c2 
It then follows easily from (308.16) and (308.19) that 
(308.25) 
(308.26) 
Substituting this result into (308.23), we get the Minkowski relations in the form 
T!JLJ =V;:(- dety)~ x I 
X [JJQ'PyLJe IP'Pe -1dYQ'P wLl we IP'Pe- "J}Ll'P w!2we IP'Pe)] 
or, in terms of ~ and ~. 
~= e0 [E + x 2 (E + vxB)- ~-x- -vv ·E], 1 - !____ c2 (1 - !____) c2 c2 
(308.27) 
(308.28) 
Eqs. (308.28) are to be compared with the classical expressions (308.15). We 
see that if one neglects all terms 0 (v2jc2) in the Minkowski constitutive equations, 
they reduce to the classical ones. MINKOWSKI's method of deriving Lorentzinvariant electromagnetic constitutive relations was extended to the case of 
moving crystals by EINSTEIN and LAUB1 and by BATEMAN 2• 
y) M oving surfaces of discontinuity, the velocity of light, and Fresnel' s dragging 
formula. If we substitute the constitutive relations (308.15) into the electromagnetic boundary conditions (278.8), (278.9) and (283.44), (283.45) at a moving surface of discontinuity, we obtain the following system of equations: 
nx[EJ-un[B]=O, [B]·n=O, [E+x(E+vxB)]·n=O,l 
(308.29) 
nx [B + 4-vx(E+vxB)] + 4-[E + x(E + vxB)]=O. c c 
The second and third of these conditions are satisfied as a consequence of the 
first and the fourth provided we assume un =f= 0. Let us suppose that the velocity v 
and the polarizability X of the dielectric medium are continuous. In this case, 
the latter two vector equations constitute a system of six homogeneaus linear 
1 [1908, 3]. 2 [1922, 1]. 
47* 
740 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 309. 
equations in the six quantities E, and B'. Therefore, the system admits nonzero solutions for the jumps [E] and [B] if and only if the determinant of the 
coefficients vanishes. To simplify matters, let us consider the case where the normal 
n to the surface of discontinuity is parallel to the velocity of the medium v. In 
this special case, the vanishing of the determinant requires that the speed of 
propagation un satisfy the quadratic equation 
K (u")2- ~ (11..!!.)' + ~~ -1 =0. c c c c2 (308.30) 
The solution of this equation is 
x-± V v--V2 K-x-- c c2 
--------
K (308.31) 
N ow when the polarizability of the medium vanishes (x = 0, K = 1) the speed 
of propagation of the surface of discontinuity is ± c. Thus the fundamental 
constant c == V1/e~.U~ is the speed of propagation of an electromagnetic discontinuity 
in vacuum or any medium in which the polarization and magnetization vanish 
and there is no free charge or current. We see that the motion of such a medium 
devoid of polarization has no effect on this result. Now set n = VK, where n 
is the index of refraction. We can then write the solution (308.31) in the form 
Un = _1_ [± 1 + ~_11_ + 0 (v2jc2)J]' c n n c {308.32) 
which, when the terms 0 (v2fc2) are neglected, reduces to FRESNEL's dassie formula 1 
for the dragging of light by a moving polarizable medium. 
If one substitutes MINKOWSKI's constitutive relations into the jump conditions, the equation analogaus to (308.30) is 
(308.33) 
Again we see that neglecting the terms 0 (v2fc 2) leads to FRESNEL's result. However, the two equations for the determination of the speed of an electromagnetic 
discontinuity in a moving Maxwellian dielectric based on the classical and Minkowski constitutive equations of the moving medium differ by terms 0 (v2jc2). 
309. VoLTERRA's electromagnetic constitutive equations. We next mention 
VoLTERRA's generalization of MAXWELL's constitutive relations for ~ and ~ 
in stationary dielectric and magnets 2• In mostreal materials, the magnetization 
is not a single-valued function of the magnetic flux B, much less a linear function. 
The magnetization at any instant, however, can be considered as a functional 
of the history of the field B (cf. Sect. 305). If the "heredity" is linear, VaLTERRA 
writes 00 
B(~.t) =ft~(x,t) + Jif>(-r)~(~.t--r)d-r, (309.1) 0 
where if>(-r) is the coefficient of heredity. When constitutive equations of this 
type are substituted into the differential field equations obtained from the 
conservation laws, one obtains a system of integro-differential equations which 
govern the evolution of the physical system rather than a system of partial differential equations as in the simpler theories. 
I WHITTAKER [1951, 39, p. 403]. 2 [1912, 7], [1930, 9, p. 195]. 
Sects. 310,311. ÜHM's law for moving conductors. 741 
310. MIE's theory. The role of the potential fields fj and a in the classical 
theory is rather odd and asymmetrical. We see that the electromagnetic potential 
a is but a subsidiary field which is generally introduced in order to facilitate the 
solution of problems. The whole system of electromagnetic equations is invariant 
under potential transformations of the electromagnetic potential (gauge transformations). On the other hand, the charge-current potential fj plays a more 
fundamental role in the classical theory because of the Maxwell-Lorentz aether 
relations, which are not invariant under potential transformations of f/· In 
MIE's theory1, the potentials a and fj are made to enter the theory in a more 
symmetrical manner. In addition to the conservation laws of charge and magnetic 
flux, MIE assumes the existence of a "universal" function A such that 
a oA 
a = aoc!i. (310.1) 
The function A is supposed to be a Lorentz-invariant function of the electromagrtetic field (/! and the electromagnetic potential a. MIE's theory is concerned 
with the fundamental question of the electromagnetic constitution of matter. 
VAN DANTZIG 2 proposed a theory somewhat similar to MIE's in which the potentials 
fj and a were assumed tobe linear fundionals of the fields (/! and lJ. We cite these 
examples of constitutive relations to illustrate the variety of viewpoints which 
have been expressed as regards the appropriate constitutive relations to accompany the conservation laws of electromagnetic theory. 
311. OnM's law for moving conductors. We consider the dass of ideal materials 
such that, when they are at rest in a Euclidean frame, the current J is a linear 
isotropic function of the electric field E: 
J=CE, C = const. (311.1) 
This relation is called Ohm's law. We generalize ÜHM's law to the case of a moving 
medium in much the same way as the constitutive equations of a Maxwellian 
dielectric were generalized in Sect. 308. First we consider the classical or rotationally invariant generalization. In terms of the charge-current vector (J and 
the velocity vector v of a motion, we define two space tensors 
:O==anta, } 
~n =an- vn aLl tLl. (311.2) 
In a Euclidean frame we have 
:0 = Q, ~ = (~, 0)' (311.3) 
where Q is the charge density and ~ is the conduction current. MAXWELL's 
generalization 3 of ÜHM's law to the case of a moving medium can then be stated 
in the form 
(311.4) 
Since ~ and ~ are space tensors, the 4-dimensional formalism insures that the 
constitutive equation (311.4) is rotationally invariant. In a Euclidean frame it 
assumes the form 
~ =C~, } 
J- Q v = C (E + V X B), (311. 5) 
1 [1912, 6]. A summary of Mm's theory is given by WEYL [1921, 6, § 26] [1950, 3.5, § 28]. 2 [1934, 10]. 3 [1873. 5, §609]. 
742 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 312. 
where (.! is the electromotive intensity at a point moving with the medium. 
When the medium is at rest, (311.5) reduces to (311.1). 
MINKOWSKI's generalization of ÜHM's law is obtained by requiring (311.1) 
to hold in the Lorentz frame in which the particle of the moving medium is 
instantaneously at rest. Thus we set 
(j!i = LQLJ afl' l 
cpgLJ = L'~' D LeLJ T'Pe• -1 
wD = (o, o, o, 1), wD = LD Ll wfl, 
(311.6) 
so that the relation (311.1) in the moving Lorentz frame can be put in the form 
(311.7) 
Applying the inverse Lorentz transformation, we then get 
Q + 1 'P e D- C D'P . e a (JY'Pea w w - y T'Pflw . (311.8) 
The spatial component of this last equation is 
J + _1_ ('J · v- c2 Q) V = C (E + v X B) c2 1 - v2(c2 1 - v2(c2 . (311.9) 
Taking the scalar product of (311.9) by v, we obtain an equation which can be 
solved for J · v: 
J · v = C V1= v2jc2 v . E + v2 Q. (311.10) 
We then eliminate J · t' from (311.9) and obtain finally 
J-Qv=. C (E+vxB-~-VV·E), Vt-v2fc2 c (311.11) 
which is the relativistic form of ÜHM's law for moving media. Again we see 
that the relativistic or Lorentz-invariant constitutive equation (311.11) differs 
from the classical or Euclidean-invariant constitutive equation (311.5) only by 
terms 0 (v2jc2). 
VII. Electromechanical constitutive equations. 
312. Elastic dielectrics. The phenomena of piezoelectricity, photoelasticity, 
and electrostriction in elastic solids are closely related. Because of their importance in engineering applications, the classical theories for these effects have become highly specialized disciplines 1. Any such theory must be based on simultaneaus application of the principles of mechanics and of electromagnetism. The 
laws of conservation of energy and momentum, agumented so as to include the 
effects of the electromagnetic field, have been formulated in Chap. F. The 
relevant equations of mechanics, aside from the boundary conditions, are conveniently summarized in the set of Eqs. (288.11) to (288.13) and (286.14). For 
dielectric media in the absence of free charge and current and of magnetization, 
the charge and current densities occurring in (288.11) and (288.12) are expressed 
in terms of the polarization Pas in (283.22). If these expressions for the charge 
1 As sources of experimental and theoretical results and references to original and contemporary Iiterature in this field we may cite the following works: VorGT [1910, 10], MASON 
[1950, 17], CADY [1946, 1], CoKER and FrLON [1931, 3], STRATTON [1941, 8]. 
Sect. 312. Elastic dielectrics. 743 
and currcnt are substituted into (288.11) and (288.12) we obtain the basic field 
equations of mechanics as applied to the case of dielectric media: 
(! x' = trs - ~ div P (§;' + -1- (~!'I>_ X B)' ,s yg yg dt ' 
• • 1 dc P a:. d" h (!e =t'sxs,, + Vfat. ~ + IV , (312.1) 
0(! ( "r) - Tt + QX ,r- 0, 
tfrs]=Q. 
We have written these equations as they appear in a general curvilinear inertial 
co-ordinate system. Under general time-independent transformations of the spatial 
Co-ordinates xk, pr and ßr transform as vector densities of weight 1. The quantities (!, e, t' 5 , h' and E, transform as absolute tensors. A comma denotes, as 
usual, covariant differentiation based on the ChristoHel symbols of the metric 
tensor g,,. Eqs. (312.1) are supplemented by the conservation laws of charge 
and magnetic flux and by the aether relations of electromagnetic theory. The 
classical theory of piezoelectricity is based on the linearized version of this system 
of equations corresponding to infinitesimal deformations and weak fields and the 
linear piezoelectric constitutive equations of VorGT, which can be expressed in 
the form 
t's = crsmn e + _1 mn yg yrs m pm ' l 1 -1 
E, = yg Xrs ps +rmn,emn• 
(312.2) 
where e,s =u(r,s> (u =displacement vector) is the classical measure of infinitesimal 
strain. Because of the relation D = e0E +P, the Voigt relations (312.2) can be 
written in various forms corresponding to different choices of independent variables. 
A thermodynamic treatment of the Voigt relations can be based on the energy 
equation (312.1) 2 by making the assumptions necessary to yield the equation 
e ()ij = div h, (312.3) 
where r; is the entropy density and () is the absolute temperature. Then by 
assuming that the internal energy s, the stresst, the electric field E, and the temperature () are functions of the infinitesimal strain measure e, the polarization P, 
and the entropy r;, we obtain VorGT's relations in the linear approximation if 
the energy equation is assumed to be satisfied identically in the independent 
variables e, P, and r;. The coefficients in the Voigt relations are then given by 
mn - lfa oe r s - e v g a;--a:ps . mn 
-1 oe 
X - ng--- (312.4) rs- o: oP•(!ps . 
The classical linear theory of piezoelectricity outlined above has been generalized to the case of finite deformation and large field strengths by ToUPIN1. 
The non-linear theory stands in the same relation to the Voigt theory as the theory 
of finite elastic deformations stands in relation to linear elasticity theory. In 
the non-linear theory, the internal energy e is assumed initially to be a general 
polynomial function of the displacement gradients xi;.l of a deformation, the 
1 [ 19 56, 20]. 
744 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. Sect. 313. 
polarization P, and the entropy density 'YJ· One then shows that if the energy 
is invariant under the group of rigid motions, it must reduce to a function of the 
variables 
1]. (312. 5) 
Assuming that (312.3) holds for this ideal medium, that the electromotive intensity, the stress, and the absolute temperature are functions of the displacement 
gradients, polarization, and entropy, and that the energy equation is satisfied 
identically yields the constitutive relations of the general theory: 
OE trs = 2 (! --X' X5 = tsr 
()CIJV ;IJ ;v ' 
(!)r- "'-~X"' i}I/IJ ;r• (312.6) 
0=~. OTJ 
Theserelations generalize the Voigt relations (312.2) to the case of finite deformations, large field strengths, and moving media. They reduce to the Voigt relations 
in the linear approximation and for stationary media. 
313. Magnetohydrodynamics. Electrodynamics of continuous media is currently enjoying a new birth of interest. This contemporary work is generally 
classified under the title, magnetohydrodynamics. The abundance of theoretical 
and experimental labor now directed toward the novel behavior of conducting 
fluids moving in a magnetic field should yield progress toward an understanding 
of the general theory of electrodynamics of continuous media. In the present 
theories of magnetohydrodynamics, the constitutive relations for the stress 
generally take the form 
(313.1) 
as in the classical theory of viscous fluids. ÜHM's law for moving media 
(311.5) is generally assumed and a simple type of constitutive relation such 
as M = kB is introduced to account for the effects of magnetization. The 
general equations of magnetohydrodynamics are obtained by substituting these 
rather special constitutive relations into (288.11) and augmenting this set of equations by the equations of conservation of charge and magnetic flux. The linear 
magnetohydrodynamic equations can then be obtained by casting away the 
non-linear terms in the general equations. Qualitative features of magnetohydrodynamic solutions are discussed by ELSASSER and ALFVEN 1. 
List of Works Cited. 
(Italic numbers in parentheses following the reference indicate the sections 
where the work is mentioned.) 
1678 1. HooKE, R.: Lectures de Potentia Restitutiva, or of Spring Explaining the Power 
of Springing Bodies. London = R. T. GtrNTHER: Early Science in Oxford 8, 
331-356 (1931). (293) 
1687 1. NEWTON, I.: Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. London. 3rd ed., 
ed. H. PEMBERTON, London 1726; trans. A. MoTTE, Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and his System of the World. London: 
1729. There are many later editions, reprints, and translations. Our references 
are to the first edition. (3, 77, 89, 196, 196A, 293, 294, 298) 
---
1 [1956, 6] [1950, 1]. 
List of Works Cited. 745 
1736 1. EuLER, L.: Mechanica sive Motus Seientia Analytice Exposita 1, Petropoli = 
Opera omnia (2) 1. (4, 99, 155) 
1738 1. BERNOULLI, D.: Hydrodynamica sive de Viribus et Motibus Fluidarum Commentarii. Argentorati. (66A, 77, 89) 
1743 1. BERNOULLI, J.: Hydraulica nunc primum detecta ac demonstrata directe ex fundamentis pure mechanicis, Opera 4, 387-493. Virtually the same work appears 
under different titles in Comm. Acad. Sei. Petrop. 9 (1737), 3-49 (1744); 10 (1738). 
207-260 (1747). (200) 
2. D'ALEMBERT, J. L.: Traite de Dynamique ... Paris. (196) 
1744 1. D' ALEMBERT, J. L.: Traite de l'Equilibre et du Mouvement des Fluides pour servir 
de Suite au Traite de Dynamique. Paris; 2nd ed., 1770. (89) · 
1745 1. CLAIRAUT, A.: Sur quelques prineipes qui donnent la solution d'un grand nombre 
de problemes de dynamique. Mem. Acad. Sei. Paris (1742), 1-52. (143, 197) 
2. EuLER, L.: Neue Grundsätze der Artillerie, aus dem Englischen des Herrn Benjamin Rohins übersetzt und mit vielen Anmerkungen versehen. Berlin = Opera 
omnia (2) 14. (66A, 70, 202, 248) 
1746 1. EuLER, L.: De motu corporum in superficiebus mobilibus. Opusc. var. arg. 1, 
1-136 = Opera omnia (2) 6, 75-174. (168) 
17 51 1. KoENIG, S.: De universaH prineipio aequilibrii et motus, in vi viva reperto, deque 
nexu inter vim vivam et actionem, utriusque minimo, dissertatio. Nova acta 
erudit., 125-135, 162-176 = L. Euleri Opera omnia (2) 5, 303-324. (167) 
1752 1. D'ALEMBERT, J. L.: Essai d'une Nouvelle Theorie de la Resistance des Fluides. 
Paris. (66A, 68, 70, 77, 86A, 88, 98, 108, 130, 140, 156, 202, 206) 
2. EuLER, L.: Decouverte d'un nouveau principe de mecanique. Mem. Acad. Sei. 
Berlin [6] (1750), 185-217 = Opera omnia (2) 5, 81-108. (1, 7, 168, 196) 
3. EuLER, L.: Recherehes sur l'effet d'une machine hydraulique proposee par Mr. Segner Professeur a Göttingue. Mem. Acad. Sei. Berlin [6] (1750), 311-354 =Opera 
omnia (2) 15, 1-39. (143, 197) 
1753 1. EuLER, L.: Recherche sur une nouvelle maniere d'elever de l'eau proposee par 
Mr. DeMour. Mem. Acad. Sei. Berlin [7] (1751), 305-330 =Opera omnia (2) 15, 
134-156. (163) 
1755 1. SEGNER, A.: ... Specimen Theoriae Turbinum, Halae Typis Gebaverianis, 27 April 
17 55. 40 pp. (168) 
17 56 1. EuLER, L.: Theorie plus complette des machines qui sont mises en mouvement 
par la reaction de l'eau. Mem. Acad. Sei. Berlin [10] (1754), 227-295 = Opera 
omnia (2) 15, 157-218. (163, 197) 
17 57 1. EuLER, L.: Prineipes generaux de l'etat d'equilibre des fluides. Mem. Acad. Sei. 
Berlin [11] (1755). 217-273 = Opera omnia (2) 12, 2-53. (200, 207, 248) 
2. EuLER, L.: Prineipes generaux du mouvement des fluides. Mem. Acad. Sei. Berlin 
[11] (1755). 274-315 = Opera omnia (2) 12, 54-91. (66A, 70, 76, 88, 89, 98, 
108, 109, 110, 156, 205, 248, 297) 
3. EuLER, L.: Continuation des recherches sur la theorie du mouvement des fluides. 
Mem. Acad. Sei. Berlin [11] (1755), 316-361 = Opera omnia (2) 12, 92-132. 
(89, 99, 109, 110, 125, 130, 137, 143, 161, 197, 248) 
1761 1. D' ALEMBERT, J. L.: Remarques sur les lois du mouvement des fluides. Opusc. 
1, 137-168. (99, 108, 133, 140, 161) 
2. EuLER, L.: Prineipia motus fluidarum (1752-1755). Novi Comm. Acad. Sei. 
Petrop. 6 (1756-1757). 271-311 = Opera omnia (2) 12, 133-168. (66A, 76, 
77, 84, 86A, 88, 98, 108, 109, 130, 141) 
1762 1. EULER, L.: Lettre de M. Euler a M. de La Grange, Recherehes sur la propagation 
des ebranlemens dans un milieu elastique. Mise. Taur. 22 (1760-1761), 1-10 = 
Opera omnia (2) 10, 255-263 = Oeuvres de Lagrange 14, 178-188. (15, 17, 20, 
66A, 156) 
2. LAGRANGE, J. L.: Nouvelles recherches sur la nature et la propagation du son. 
Mise. Taur. 22 (1760-1761). 11-172 = Oeuvres 1, 151-316. (20, 108) 
3. LAG RANGE, J. L.: Application de la methode exposee dans le memoire precedent 
a la solution de differens problemes de dynamique. Mise. Taur. 22 (1760-1761). 
196-298 = Oeuvres 1, 365-468. (86A, 140, 160, 233) 
1764 1. EULER, L.: De motu fluidarum a diverse caloris gradu oriundo. Novi Comm. 
Acad. Sei. Petrop. 11 (1765), 232-267 = Opera omnia (2) 12, 244-271. (248) 
1765 1. EuLER, L.: Theoria Motus Corporum Solidarum seu Rigiderum ex Primis nostrae 
Cognitionis Principiis Stabilita et ad Omnis Motus, qui in hujusmodi Corpora Cadere 
Possunt, Accomodata. Rosteck = Opera omnia (2) 3 and 4, 3-293. (165, 168, 196, 
294) 
746 
2. 
3. 
1766 1. 
1767 1. 
1768 1. 
2. 
1769 1. 
1770 1. 
1771 1. 
2. 
1776 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1783 1. 
1786 1. 
1788 1. 
1806 1. 
1821 1. 
1822 1. 
2. 
1823 1. 
2. 
3. 
1824 1. 
1825 1. 
2. 
1827 1. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
EuLER, L.: Recherehes sur Ia connaissance mecanique des corps. Mem. Acad. 
Sei. Berlin [14] (1758), 131-153. (165, 168) 
EuLER, L.: Du mouvement de rotation des corps solides autour d'un axe variable. 
Mem. Acad. Sei. Berlin [14] (1758), 154-193. (143, 170) 
EuLER, L.: Supplement aux recherches sur Ia propagation du son. Mem. Acad. 
Sei. Berlin [15] (1759), 210-240 = Opera omnia (3) 1, 452-483. (17, 20, 66A, 
156) 
EuLER, L.: Recherehes sur le mouvement des rivieres (1751). Mem. Acad. Sei. 
Berlin [16] (1760), 101-118 = Opera omnia (2) 12, 212-288. (66A, 125) 
D' ALEMBERT, J. L.: Sur l'equation qui exprime Ia loi du mouvement des fluides. 
Opusc. math. 5, No. 33, 95-131. (161) 
D' ALEMBERT, J. L.: Suite des recherches sur le mouvement des fluides. Opusc. 
math. 5, No. 34, 132-170. (202) 
EuLER, L.: Sectio prima de statu aequilibrii fluidorum. Novi Comm. Acad. Sei. 
Petrop. 13 (1768), 305-416 = Opera omnia (2) 13, 1-72. (7, 248) 
EuLER, L.: Sectio secunda de principiis motus fluidorum. Novi Comm. Acad. Sei. 
Petrop. 14 (1769), 270-386 = Opera omnia (2) 13, 73-153. (15, 17, 20, 66A, 
72, 76, 82A, 84, 88, 89, 109, 156, 160, 164, 210, 297) 
EuLER, L.: Sectio tertia de motu fluidarum lineari potissimum aquae. Novi Comm. 
Acad. Sei. Petrop. 15 (1770), 219-360 = Opera omnia (2) 13, 154-261. (248) 
EuLER, L.: Genuina principia doctrinae de statu aequilibrii et motu corporum 
tarn perfecte flexibilium quam elasticorum. Novi Comm. Acad. Sei. Petrop. 15 
(1770), 381-413 = Opera omnia (2) 11, 37-61. (200, 214) 
CouLOMB, C. A. : Essai sur une application des regles de maximis et minimis a 
quelques problemes de statique, relatifs a l'architecture. Mem. divers savants 7 
(1773), 343-382. (200, 204) 
EULER, L.: Formulae generales pro translatione quacunque corporum rigidorum. 
Novi Comm. Acad. Sei. Petrop. 20 (1775), 189-207. (168, 196) 
EuLER, L.: Nova methodus motum corporum rigidorum determinandi. Novi Comm. 
Acad. Sei. Petrop. 20 (1775), 208-238. (170) 
EuLER, L.: De gemina methodo tarn aequilibrium quam motus corporum flexibilium determinandi et utriusque egregio consensu. Novi Comm. Acad. Sei. Petrop. 
20 (1775), 286-303 = Opera omnia (2) 11, 180-193. (214) 
LAGRANGE, J. L.: Memoire sur Ia theorie du mouvement des fluides. Nouv. mem. 
Acad. Sei. Berlin (1781), 151-198 =Oeuvres 4, 695-748. (72, 74, 99, 134, 161, 
163, 184, 206) 
CousiN, J. A. J.: Memoire contenarrt quelques remarques sur Ia theorie mathematique du mouvement des fluides. Mem. Acad. Sei. Paris (1783), 665-692. (72) 
LAGRANGE, J. L.: Mechanique Analitique. Paris. Oeuvres 11, 12, are the 5th ed. 
Our references are to the first edititon. (6, 15, 20, 72, 74, 99, 134, 196, 232) 
EULER, L. : Die Gesetze des Gleichgewichts und der Bewegung flüssiger Körper. 
Leipzig (being a transl., with some changes and additions, by H. W. BRANDES, 
of [1769, 1], [1770, 1], [1771, 1], and another paper). (108) 
NA VIER, C.-L.-M.-H.: Sur !es lois des mouvements des fluides, en ayant egard a 
l'adhesion des moh~cules. Ann. chimie 19, 244-260. (298) 
FouRIER, J.: Theorie Analytique de Ia Chaleur. Paris = Oeuvres 1. (241, 296) 
NA VIER, C.-L.-M.-H.: Sur ]es lois du mouvement des fluides, en ayant egard a 
l'adhesion de leurs molecules. Bull. Soc. Philomath. 7 5-79. (298) 
CAUCHY, A.-L.: Recherehes sur l'equilibre et le mouvement interieur des corps 
solides ou fluides, elastiques ou non elastiques. Bull. Soc. Philomath. 9-13 = 
Oeuvres (2) 2, 300-304. (7, 21, 26, 27, 82A, 200, 203, 298, 300, 301) 
CAUCHY, A.-L.: Memoire sur une espece particuliere de mouvement des fluides. 
J. Ecole Polytech. 12, cahier 19, 204-214 = Oeuvres (2) 1, 264-274. (77, 99) 
NA VIER, C.-L.-M.-H.: Sur !es lois de l'equilibre et du mouvement des corpssolides 
elastiques (1821). Bull. Soc. Philomath., 177-181. (Abstract of [1827, 7].) (301) 
CARNOT, S.: Reflexions sur Ia Puissance Motrice du Feu et sur !es Machirres Propres 
a Developper cette Puissance. Paris= Ann. Ecole Norm. (2) 1, 393-457 (1872). 
See [1878, 1]. (240) 
NA VIER, C.-L.-M.-H.: Memoire sur !es lois du mouvement des fluides, en ayant 
egard a l'adhesion des mo!ecules (1822). Bull. Soc. Philomath. 49-52. (Abstract 
of [1827, 6].) (298) 
PIOLA, G.: Sull' applicazione de' principj della meccanica analitica del Lagrange 
ai principali problemi. Milano: Regia Stamparia, VII + 252 pp. (17, 82, 156) 
CAUCHY, A.-L.: De Ia pression ou tension dans un corps solide. Ex. de math. 2, 
42-56 = Oeuvres (2) 7, 60-78. (21, 200, 203, 204, 205) 
List of Works Cited. 747 
2. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur la eondensation et la dilatation des eorps solides. Ex. de math. 
2, 60-69 = Oeuvres (2) 7, 82-83. (21, 22, 26, 27, 30, 54, 57, 82A) 
3. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur les moments d'inertie. Ex. de math. 2, 93-103 = Oeuvres 
(2) 7, 124-136. (168) 
4. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur les relations qui existent dans l'etat d'equilibre d'un eorps 
solide ou fluide, entre les pressions ou tensions et les forees aeeeleratriees. Ex. 
de math. 2, 108-111 = Oeuvres (2) 7, 141-145. (205) 
5. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Theorie de la propagation des ondes a la surfaee d'un fluide pesant 
d'une profondeur indefinie (1815). Mem. divers savants (2) 1 (1816), 3-312 = 
Oeuvres (1) 1, 5-318. (20, 86A, 134, 206) 
6. NAVIER, C.-L.-M.-H.: Memoire sur les lois du mouvement des fluides (1822). Mem. 
Aead. Sei. lnst. Franee (2) 6, 389-440. (289) 
7. NA VIER, C.-L.-M.-H.: Memoire sur les lois de l'equilibre et du mouvement des 
eorps solides elastiques (1821). Mem. Aead. Sei. lnst. Franee (2) 7, 375-393- (301) 
1828 1. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur les eentres, les plans prineipaux et les axes prineipaux des 
surfaees du seeond degre. Ex. de math. 3, 1-22 = Oeuvres (2) 8, 9-35. (28) 
2. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur les equations qui expriment !es eonditions d'equilibre, ou !es 
lois du mouvement interieur d'un eorps solide, elastique, ou non elastique. Ex. de 
math. 3, 160-187 = Oeuvres (2) 8, 195-226. (205, 298, 300, 301) 
3. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur quelques theoremes relatifs a Ia eondensation Oll a Ia dilatation 
des eorps. Ex. de math. 3, 237-244 = Oeuvres (2) 8, 278-287. (27, 82A) 
1829 1. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur !es pressions ou tensions supportees en un point donne d'un 
eorps solide par trois plans perpendieulaires entre eux. Ex. de math. 4, 30-40 = 
Oeuvres (2) 9, 41- 52. (203) 
2. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur Ia relation qui existe entre !es pressions ou tensions supportees 
par deux plans quelconques en un point donne d'un eorps solide. Ex. de math. 4, 
41-46 =Oeuvres (2) 9, 53-55. (205) 
3. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur !es eorps solides ou fluides dans lesquels Ia eondensation ou 
dilatation lineaire est la meme en tous sens autour de ehaque point. Ex. de math. 
4, 214-216 = Oeuvres (2) 9, 254-258. (142) 
4. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur l'equilibre et le mouvement interieur des eorps eonsideres 
eomme des masses eontinues. Ex. de math. 4, 293-319 =Oeuvres (2) 9, 243-369. 
(150, 293, 301, 304) 
5. PorssoN, S.-D.: Memoire sur l'equilibre et le mouvement des eorps elastiques 
(1828). Mem. Aead. Sei. Inst. Franee (2) 8, 357-570. (205, 301) 
1830 1. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Sur !es diverses methodes a l'aide desquellesOll peut etablir !es 
equations qui representent !es lois d'equilibre, ou le mouvement interieurdes eorps 
solides ou fluides. Bull. sei. math. soe. prop. eonn. 13, 169-176. (301) 
1831 1. FARADAY, M.: On a peeuliar class of optieal deeeptions. J. Roy. Inst. Gt. Brit. 1, 
205-223 =Res. Chem. Phys. 291-309 (1859). (70) 
2. PorssoN, S.-D.: Memoire sur !es equations generales de l'equilibre et du mouvement 
des eorps solides elastiques et des fluides ( 1829). J. Ecole Polytech. 13, eahier 20, 
1-174. (134, 184, 205, 298, 301) 
1832 1. DuHAMEL, J .-M.-C.: Memoire sur !es equations generales de Ia propagation de Ia 
ehaleur dans !es eorps solides dont Ia eonduetibilite n'est pas Ia meme dans tous 
!es sens (1828). J. Eeole Polyteeh. 13, eahier 21, 356-399- (296) 
1833 1. FouRIER, J.: Sur le mouvement de Ia ehaleur dans !es fluides. Mem. Aead. Sei. 
Inst. Franee (2) 12, 507-530 = Oeuvres 2, 595-614. (241, 296) 
2. LAME, G., et E. CLAPEYRON: Memoire sur l'equilibre des eorps solides homogenes. 
Mem. divers savants (2) 4, 465-562. (21) 
3. PIOLA, G.: La meeeaniea de' eorpi naturalmente estesi trattata eol ealcolo delle 
variazioni. Opuse. mat. fis. di diversi autori. Milano: Giusti 1, 201-236. (29, 
9.5, 210, 232) 
4. PorssoN, S.-D.: Traite de Meeanique, 2nd ed. Paris. (134, 184) 
1834 1. CLAPEYRON, E.: Memoire sur Ia puissanee motriee de Ia chaleur. J. Eeole Polyteeh. 
14, cahier 23, 153-190. (245, 252) 
1835 1. CoRIOLIS, G.: Memoire sur la maniere d'etablir !es differents principes de Ia mecanique pour des systemes de eorps, en !es eonsiderant eomme des assemblages de 
moleeules. J. Eeole Polyteeh. 15, eahier 24, 93-132. (86) 
2. CoRTOLIS,G.: Memoire sur !es equations du mouvement relatif des systemes de eorps. 
J. Eeole Polytech. 15, eahier 24, 142-154. (143) 
1836 1. ProLA, G.: Nuova analisi per tutte Je questioni della meeeaniea moleeolare. Mem. 
Mat. Fis. Soe. Ital. Modena 21 (1835), 155-321. (17, 26, 72, 82A, 95, 96, 101, 
109, 156, 210) 
748 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
1837 1. EARNSHAW, S.: On fluid motion, so far it is expressed by the equation of continuity. 
Trans. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 6 (1836-1838), 203-233. (110) 
2. jACOBI, C. J. J.: Über die Reduktion der Integration der partiellen Differentialgleichungen erster Ordnung zwischen irgend einer Zahl Variabeln auf die Integration eines einzigen Systems gewöhnlicher Differentialgleichungen. J. reine angew. 
Math. 17, 97-162 = Werke 4, 57-127. (219) 
3. MöBIUS, A. F.: Lehrbuch der Statik, 2 vols., xx + 356 + 314 pp. Leipzig: 
Göschen. (219) 
4. MoHR, F.: Ansichten über die Natur der Wärme. Ann. der Pharm. 24,141-147. 
Trans!., P.G.TAIT, Views of the nature of heat. Phil. Mag. (5) 2 (1876), 110-114. 
(240) 
1839 1. GREEN, G.: On the laws of reflection and refraction of light at the common surface 
of two non-crystallized media (1837). Trans. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 7 (1838-1842), 
1-24 = Papers, 245-269. (33A, 218, 232A, 262, 301, 303) 
2. SEGUIN, M.: De l'Influence des Chemins de Fer et de l'Art de les Tracer et de les 
Construire. Paris. (240) 
1841 1. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Memoire sur !es dilatations, les condensations et les rotations 
produits par un changement de forme dans un systeme de points materiels. Ex. 
d'an. phys. math. 2, 302-330 = Oeuvres (2) 12, 343-377. (26, 2'1, 28, 33A, 
36, 56, 5'1, 85, 86, 86A) 
2. GREEN, G.: On the propagation of light in crystallized media (1839). Trans. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 7 (1839-1842), 121-140 = Papers 293-311. (26, 31, 262, 
301, 303) 
3. J ACOBI, C. J. J.: De determinantibus functionalibus. J. reine angew. Math. 22, 
319-359 = Werke 3, 393-438. (1'1) 
4. LAME, G.: Memoire sur les surfaces isostatiques dans les corps solides homogenes 
en equilibre d'elasticite. J. Math. pures appl. 6, 37-60. (205A, 209) 
5. SVANBERG, A. F.: On fluides rörelse. K. Vetenskapsacad. handlingar (1839), 
139-154. Trans!., Sur le mouvement des fluides. J. reine angew. Math. 24 ( 1842), 
153-163. (99, 133) 
1842 1. CHALLIS, J.: A general investigation of the differential equations applicable to the 
motion of fluids. Trans. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 7 (1839-1842), 371-396. (136) 
2. MAYER, J. R.: Bemerkungen über die Kräfte der unbelebten Natur. Liebigs Ann. 
Chem. 42, 233-240 = pp. 3-12 of J. R. MAYER, Die Mechanik der Wärme. 
Stuttgart 1867 = [1929, 8, pp. 35-42]. Trans!., G. C. FosTER, Remarks on the 
forces of inorganic nature. Phil. Mag. (4) 24, 371-377 (1862); transl., G. SARTON 
[1929, 8, pp.27-33]; transl., W. F. MAGIE, A Source Bookin Physics pp.197-203. 
New York and London 1934. (240, 253) 
3. PowER, ]. : On the truth of the hydrodynamical theorem, that if u dx + v dy + w dz be a complete differential with respect to x, y, z at any one instant, it is always 
so. Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 7 (1839-1842), 455-464. (134) 
4. STOKES, G. G.: On the steady motion of incompressible fluids. Trans. Cambridge 
Phil. Soc. 7 (1839-1842), 439-453 = Papers 1, 1-16. (125, 126, 133, 161, 162) 
1843 1. CAUCHY, A.-L.: Note sur les pressions supportees, dans un corps solide ou fluide, 
par deux portians de surface tres voisine, l'une exterieure, l'autre interieure a ce 
meme corps. C.R. Acad. Sei., Paris 16, 151-156 = Oeuvres (1) 1, 246-251. (205) 
2. ] ouLE, ] . P.: On the caloric effects of magneto-electricity, and on the mechanical 
value of heat. Phil. Mag. (3) 23, 263-276, 347-355. 435-443 = Papers 1, 
123- 159. (Abstract in Rep. Brit. Assn. (1843). 33 = [1929, 8, p. 43].) (240) 
3. ST. VENANT, A.-] .-C. B. DE: Memoire sur Je calcul de la resistance et de la flexion 
des pieces solides a simple ou a double courbure, en prenant simultanement en 
consideration !es divers efforts auxquels elles peuvent etre soumises dans tous les 
sens. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 17, 942-954, 1020-1031. (60, 63A, 214) 
4. ST. VENANT, A.-J.-C. B. DE: Note a joindre au memoire sur la dynamique des 
fluides, presente Je 14 Avril 1834. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 17, 1240-1243. (298) 
5. WATERSTON, J. J.: Note on the physical constitution of gaseaus fluids and a theory 
of heat, appendix to Thoughts on the Mental Functions. Edinburgh = Papers, 
183-206. (240) 
1844 1. BINET, J.: Memoire sur l'integration des equations de la courbe elastique a double 
courbure. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 18, 1115-1119. (63A) 
2. J ACOBI, C. J. J.: Theoria novi multiplicatoris systemati aequationum differentialium vulgarium applicandi. J. reine angew. Math. 27, 199-268 = Werke 4, 
317-394. (17) 
3. ST. VENANT, A.-J .-C. B. DE: Sur les pressions qui se developpent a l'interieur des 
corps solides lorsque les deplacements de leurs points, sans alterer l'elastieite, ne 
4. 
1845 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1846 1. 
1847 1. 
2. 
3. 
1848 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1849 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
List of Works Cited. 749 
peuvent cependant pas etre consideres comme tres petits. Bull. Soc. Philomath. 
5, 26-28. (31, 55) 
STOKES, G. G.: On some cases of fluid motion. Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 8 
(1844-1849). 105-137 = Papers 1, 17-68. (114) 
JoULE, J. P.: On the changes of temperature produced by rarefaction and condensation of air (1844). Phi!. Mag. (3) 26, 369-383 =Papers 1, 171-189. (240) 
JOULE, J. P.: On the existence of an equivalent relation between heat and the 
ordinary forms of mechanical power. Phi!. Mag. (3) 27, 205-207 = Papers 1, 
202-205. (240) 
ST. VENANT, A.-J.-C. B. DE: Note sur l'etat d'equilibre d'une verge elastique ä. 
double courhure lorsque !es deplacements eprouves par ses points, par suite de 
l'action des forces qui Ia sollicitent, ne sont pas tres petits. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
19, 36-44, 181-187. (63A) 
STOKES, G. G.: On the theories of the internal friction of fluids in motion, and 
of the equilibrium and motion of elastic solids. Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 8 
(1844-1849). 287-319 =Papers 1, 75-129. (72, 82A, 86, 90, 96, 134, 142, 298) 
STOKES, G. G.: Report on recent researches in hydrodynamics. Rep. Brit. Assn. 
Pt. I, 1-20 = Papers 1, 151-187. (134) 
HoPKINS, W.: On the internal pressure to which rock masses may be subjected, 
and its possible influence in the production of the Iaminated structure. Trans. 
Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 8 (1844-1849). 456-470. (203, 204) 
JOULE, J. P.: On matter, living forces, and heat. Manchester Courier, May 5 and 
12 = Papers 1, 265-276 = pp. 385-390 of E. C. WATSON: Joule's only general 
exposition of the principle of conservation of energy. Am er. J. Phys. 15, 383-390 
(1947). (240) 
ST. VENANT, A.-J .-C. B. DE: Memoire sur l'equilibre des corps solides, dans !es 
limites de leur elasticite, et sur !es conditions de leur resistance, quand !es deplacements ne sont pas tres petits. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 24, 260-263. (31, 55) 
MAcCuLLAGH, J.: An essay towards a dynamical theory of crystalline reflection 
and refraction (1839). Trans. Roy. Irish Acad. Sei. 21, 17-50 = Works, 145-184. 
(86A, 302) 
PIOLA, G.: Intorno alle equazioni fondamentali del movimento di corpi qualsivogliono, considerati secondo Ia naturale loro forma e costituzione (1845). Mem. 
Mat. Fis. Soc. Ital. Modena 241, 1-186. (17, 20, 26, 72, 82, 82A, 95, 96, 156, 204, 
205, 210, 232) 
STOKES, G. G.: Notes on hydrodynamics (4), Demonstration of a fundamental 
thcorem. Cambr. Dubl. Math. J. 3, 209-219 = (with added notes) Papers 2, 
36-so. (129, 134) 
STOKES, G. G.: On a difficulty in the theory of sound. Phi!. Mag. 23, 349-356. 
A drastically condensed version, with an added note, appears in Papers 2, 51-55. 
(7, 177, 185, 189, 205, 241, 297) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): Notes on hydrodynamics (2), On the equation of 
the bounding surface. Cambr. Dubl. Math. J. 3, 89-93 = Papers 1, 83-87. 
(74, 177, 184) 
HAUGHTON, S.: On the equilibrium and motion of solid and fluid bodies (1846). 
Trans. Roy. Irish Acad. 21, 151-198. (205, 232A) 
ScHWEINS, F.: Fliehmomente, oder die Summe L (x X+ yY) bei Kräften in der 
Ebene, und L (x X+ y Y + zZ) bei Kräften im Raume. J. reine angew. Math. 
38, 77-88. (219) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): Notes on hydrodynamics (5), On the vis-viva of 
a liquid in motion. Cambr. Dubl. Math. J. 4, 90-94 =Papers 1, 107-112. (94, 
113, 169) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): An account of Carnot's theory of the motive power 
of heat; with numerical results deduced from Regnault's experiments on steam. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 16, 541-574 = Ann. Chimie 35, 248-255 (1852) =Papers 
1, 113-155· (245) 
1850 1. CLAUSIUS, R.: Über die bewegende Kraft der Wärme und die Gesetze, welche sich 
daraus für die Wärmelehre selbst ableiten lassen. Ann. Physik (3) 19, 368-398, 
500-524 = Abh. 1, 16-78. Trans!., On the moving force of heat, and the laws 
regarding the nature of heat itself which are dedueible therefrom. Phi!. Mag. (4) 
2 (1851). 1-21, 102-119; transl., W. F. MAGIE, On the motivepower of heat, 
and on the laws which can be deduced from it for the theory of heat, pp. 65-107 
of The Second Law of Thermodynamics. New York and London 1899. (245, 248, 
252, 253) 
750 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
2. KIRCHHOFF, G.: Über das Gleichgewicht und die Bewegung einer elastischen Scheibe. 
J. reine angew. Math. 40, 51-88 = Ges. Abh. 237-279. (232A, 262) 
3. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): Remarks on the forces experienced by inductively 
magnetized ferromagnetic or diamagnetic non-crystalline substances. Phi!. Mag. 
(3) 37, 241-253 = Papers Electr. Magn., §§ 647-668. (102) 
1851 1. RANKINE, W. J. M.: Laws of the elasticity of solid bodies. Cambr. Dubl. Math. J. 
6, 41-80, 178-181, 185-186 = Papers 67-101. (25) 
2. STOKES, G. G.: On the effect of the internal friction of fluids on the motion of pendulums (1850). Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 92, 8-106 =Papers 3, 1-141. (72, 
170, 217, 298) 
3. STOKES, G. G.: On the conduction of heat in crystals. Cambr. Dubl. Math. J. 6, 
215-238=Papers 3, 203-227. (241) 
1852 1. KIRcHHOFF, G.: Über die Gleichungen des Gleichgewichts eines elastischen Kör· 
pers bei nicht unendlich kleinen Verschiebungen seiner Theile. Sitzgsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien 9, 762-773. (Not repr. in Abh.) (19, 210, 217, 236A, 256A, 262, 303) 
2. LAME, G.: Le~ons sur Ia Theorie Mathematique de l'Elasticite. Also 2nd ed., 
Paris 1866. (21) 
1853 1. RANKINE, W. J. M.: On the mechanical action of heat I-V (1850-1851). Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Edinb. 20, 147-210. (245) 
2. REECH, M. F.: Theorie generale des effets dynamiques de Ia chaleur. J. Math. 
pures appl. 18, 357-568. (245, 252) 
3. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): On the dynamical theory of heat I-V (1851). 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 20, 261-293, 475-483 =Phi!. Mag. (4) 4, (1852) 8-20, 
105-117, 168-176, 424-434, 9 (1855), 523-531 = Papers 1, 174-232. Pts. 
I-III = pp. 111-146 of The Second Law of Thermodynamics, ed. W. F. MAGIE. 
New York and London 1899. (245) 
1854 1. CLAUSIUS, R.: Über eine veränderte Form des zweiten Hauptsatzes der mechanischen Wärmetheorie. Ann. Physik 93, 481-506 = Abh. 1, 126-154. (245, 248, 
249, 252, 258) 
2. ScHWEINS, F.: Theorie der Dreh- und Fliehmomente der parallelen Seitenkräfte, 
in welche Kräfte im Raume zerlegt werden können. J. reine angew. Math. 47, 
238-245. (219) 
1855 1. FICK, A.: Über Diffusion. Ann. der Phys. 94, 59-86. (158, 295) 
2. HAUGHTON, S.: On a classification of elastic media, and the laws of plane waves 
propagated through them ( 1849). Trans. Roy. Irish Acad. Pt. I-Science 22, 97-138. 
(205, 232) 
3. MEISSEL, E.: Über einen speciellen Fall des Ausflusses von Wasser in einer verticalen Ebene. Ann. Physik (4) 5, 276-283. (161) 
4. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): On the thermo-elastic and thermo-magnetic properties of matter. Quart. J. Math. 1 (1855-1857) 55-77 = (with notes and 
additions) Phi!. Mag. (5) 5 (1878), 4-27 = Pt. VII of On the dynamical theory 
of heat. Papers 1, 291-316. (218, 262) 
1856 1. RANKINE, W. J. M.: On axes of elasticity and crystalline forms. Phi!. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. Lond. (146) 46, 261-285 = Papers 119-149. (200) 
2. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): Elements of a mathematical theory of elasticity. 
Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 146, 481-498. (See [1877, 5].) (262) 
1857 1. CLEBSCH, A.: Über eine allgemeine Transformation der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen. J. reine angew. Math. 54, 293-312. (125, 136, 137, 162, 210) 
1858 1. HELMHOLTZ, H.: Über Integrale der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen, welche den 
Wirbelbewegungen entsprechen. J. reine angew. Math. 55, 25-55 = Wiss. Abh. 
1, 101-134. Trans!., P. G. TAIT, On integrals of the hydrodynamical equations, 
which express vortex-motion. Phi!. Mag. (4) 33, (1867) 485-512. (8, 75, 88, 93, 
106, 108, 113, 133, 175, 185, 186, 218) 
1859 1. CLEBSCH, A.: Über die Integration der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen. J. reine 
angew. Math. 56, 1-10. (136, 136A) 
2. KIRCHHOFF, G.: Über das Gleichgewicht und die Bewegung eines unendlich dünnen elastischen Stabes. J. reine angew. Math. 56,285-313 = Ges. Abh., 285-316. 
(57, 63A, 214, 236A, 301) 
3. LAME, G.: Le~ons sur !es Coordonnees Curvilignes et leurs divers Applications. 
Paris: Mallet-Bachelier. xxvii + 368 pp. (205 A, 209) 
1860 1. DIRICHLET, G. LEJEUNE: Untersuchungen über ein Problem der Hydrodynamik. 
Gött. Abh., math. Cl. 8 (1858-1859), 3-42 = J. reine angew. Math. 58, 181-216 
(1861) = Werke 2, 263-301. (66) 
2. MAXWELL, J. C.: Illustrations of the dynamical theory of gases. Phi!. Mag. (4) 19, 
19-32 and 20,21-37 =Papers 1, 377-409. (295) 
3. 
4. 
1861 1. 
2. 
1862 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1863 1. 
2. 
1864 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1865 1. 
2. 
1866 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1867 1. 
2. 
3. 
1868 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
List of Works Cited. 751 
NEUMANN, C.: Zur Theorie der Elasticität. J. reine angew. Math. 57, 281-318 
(210) 
RIEMANN, B.: Ueber die Fortpflanzung ebener Luftwellen von endlicher Schwingungsweite. Gött. Abh., math. Cl. 8 (1858-1859), 43-65 = Werke, 145-164. 
(185, 189, 205) 
HANKEL, H.: Zur allgemeinen Theorie der Bewegung der Flüssigkeiten. Göttingen. 
(66A, 88, 108, 128, 136) 
WARREN, J. W.: On invariant points, lines, and surfaces in space, and their physical 
significance. Amer. J. Math. 4, 306-310. (38) 
CLAUSIUS, R.: Ueber die Anwendung des Satzes von der Aequivalenz der Verwandlungen auf die innere Arbeit. Vjschr. nat. Ges. Zürich 7, 48-95 = Ann. 
Physik 116, 73-112 = Abh. 1, 242-279. (245, 258) 
CLEBSCH, A.: Theorie der Elasticität fester Körper. Leipzig. (63A, 214) 
EULER, L.: Fragmentum 97, Opera postuma 1, 494-496 = Opera omnia (1) 29, 
437-440. (33A) 
EULER, L.: Anleitung zur Natur-Lehre, worin die Gründe zu Erklärung aller in 
der Natur sich ereignenden Begebenheiten und Veränderungen festgesetzt werden 
(probably written between 1755 and 1759). Opera postuma 2, 449-560 = Opera 
omnia (3) 1, 16-178. (76) 
W ARREN, J. W.: On the internal pressure within an elastic solid. Quart. J. Math. 
5, 109-117. (21) 
AIRY, G. B.: On the strains in the interior of beams. Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 
153, 49-80. Abstract in Rep. Brit. Assn. 1862, 82-86 (1863). (224) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN}: Dynamical problems regarding elastic spheroidal 
shells and spheroids of incompressible liquid. Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 153, 
583-616 =Papers 3, 351-394. (262, 301, 303} 
JouLE, J. P.: Note on the history of the dynamical theory of heat. Phi!. Mag. 
(4) 28, 150-151. (240) 
RANKINE, W. J. M.: On plane water-lines in two dimensions. Phi!. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. Lond. 154, 369-391 = Papers 495-521. (71, 161) 
ST. VENANT, A.-J .-C. B. DE: Etablissement elementaire des formules et equations 
generales de Ia theorie de l'elasticite des corps solides. Appendix in: Resurne des 
Lec;:ons donnees a l'Ecole des Ponts et Chaussees sur l'Application de Ia Mecanique, 
premiere partie, premiere section, De Ia Resistance des Corps Solides, par C.-L.-
M.-H. NA VIER, 3rd. ed. Paris. (57) 
ST. VENANT, A.-J .-C. B. DE: Theorie de l'elasticite des solides, ou cinematique de 
leurs deformations. L'Institut 321, 389-390. (27) 
WARREN, J. W.: Note on a transformation of the generat equation of wave propagation, due to internal force. Quart. J. Math. 6, 137-139. (209) 
CLAUSIUS, R.: Ueber verschiedene für die Anwendung bequeme Formen der Hauptgleichungen der mechanischen Wärmetheorie. Vjschr. nat. Ges. Zürich 10, 1-59 
= Ann. der Phys. 125. 353-400 = Abh. 2, 1-44. (245, 246, 258, 264) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN}: On the elasticity and viscosity of metals. Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Lond. 14, 289-297. (See [1877, 5].) 
DARBOUX, G.: Sur les surfaces orthogonales. Ann. Ecole Norm. (1) 3, 97-141. 
(122) 
]ACOBI, C. J. J.: Vorlesungen über Dynamik (1842-1843). Werke, Suppl. (219). 
LIPSCHITZ, R.: Ueber einen algebraischen Typus der Bedingungen eines bewegten 
Massensystems. J. reine angew. Math. 66, 363-374. (219) 
V ERDET, E.: Introduction, Oeuvres de Fresnel 1, IX-XCIX. (301) 
BERTRAND, J.: Theoreme relatif au mouvement le plus generat d'un fluide. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 66, 1127-1230. (78, 86, 86A, 89) 
MAXWELL, J. C.: On the dynamical theory of gases ( 1866). Phi!. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. Lond. 157, 49-88 = Phi!. Mag. (4} 35 (1868), 129-145, 185-217 =Papers, 
2, 26-78. (215, 243, 295, 305) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN}, and P. G. TAIT: Treatise on Natural Philosophy. 
Part I. Cambridge. (8, 12, 21, 27, 35, 36, 38, 42, 45, 46, 167, 205, 262) 
Anonymous: Les Mondes 17, 620-623. (89) 
BERTRAND, J.: Note relative a Ia theorie des fluides. Reponse a Ia communication 
de M. Helmholtz. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 67, 267-269. (86A) 
BERTRAND, J.: Observations nouvelles sur un memoire de M. Helmholtz. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 67, 469-472. (86A) 
BERTRAND, J.: Reponse a Ia note de M. Helmholtz. c. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 67, 
773-775- (86A) 
752 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
5. FRESNEL, A.: Premiere memoire sur Ia double refraction (1821). Oeuvres 2, 
261-308. (208, 209) 
6. FRESNEL, A.: Supplement au memoire sur la double refraction (1822). Oeuvres 
2, 343-367. (21, 208, 209) 
7. FRESNEL, A.: Second supplement au memoire sur Ia double refraction (1822). 
Oeuvres 2, 369-442. (21, 203, 205, 208, 209) 
8. HELMHOLTZ, H.: Sur le mouvement le plus general d'un fluide. Reponse a une 
communication precedente de M. J. Bertrand. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 67, 221-225 
= Wiss. Abh. 1, 135-139. (86A) 
9. HELMHOLTZ, H.: Sur le mouvement des fluides. Deuxieme reponse a M. J. Bertrand. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 67, 754-757 = Wiss. Abh. 1, 140-144. (86A) 
10. HELMHOL TZ, H.: Reponse a Ia note de M. J. Bertrand, du 19 Octobre. c. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 67, 1034-1035 = Wiss. Abh. 1, 145. (86A) 
11. KIRCHHOFF, G.: Ueber den Einfluß der Wärmeleitung in einem Gase auf die Schallbewegung. Ann. Physik 134, 177-193 = Ges. Abh. 1, 540-556. (241, 248) 
12. MAXWELL, J. C.: On reciprocal diagrams in space, and their relation to Airy's 
function of stress. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (1) 2 (1865-1969), 58-60 = Papers 
2, 102-104. (227) 
13. RIEMANN, B.: Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen (1854). 
Abh. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen 13, (1866-1867) 133-150 =Werke, 2nd. ed. (1892), 
272-287. (34) 
14. TAIT, P. G.: Sketch of Thermodynamics. London. (240) 
15. WALTER, A.: Anwendung der Methode Hamiltons auf die Grundgleichungen der 
mathematischen Theorie der Elasticität. Diss. Berlin. (We have not been able 
to see this work.) (236) 
16. WARREN, J.: Theorem with regard to the three axes of invariable direction in a 
strained elastic body. Quart. J. Math. 9, 171-172. (38) 
17. WEBER, H.: Über eine Transformation der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen. J. 
reine angew. Math. 68, 286-292. (135) 
1869 1. CHRlSTOFFEL, E. B.: Über die Transformation der homogenen Differentialausdrücke 
2ten Grades. J. reine angew. Math. 70, 46-70 = Abh. 1, 352-377 (34) 
2. CHRISTOFFEL, E. B.: Über ein die Transformation homogener Differentialausdrücke 
zweiten Grades betreffendes Theorem. J. reine angew. Math. 70, 241 -24 5 = 
Abh. 1, 378-382 (34) 
3. LIPSCHITZ, R.: Untersuchungen in Betreff der ganzen homogenen Functionen von 
n Variablen. J. reine angew. Math. 70, 71-102. (34) 
4. MASSIEU, F.: Sur les fonctions caracteristiques des divers fluides. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 69, 858-862. (251) 
5. MAssrEu, F.: Addition au precedent memoire sur les fonctions caracteristiques. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 69, 1057-1061. (251) 
6. ST. VENANT, A.-J .-C. B. DE: Probleme des mouvements que peuvent prendre les 
divers points d'une liquide, ou solide ductile, contenue dans un vase a parois verticales, pendant son ecoulement par un orifice horizontal interieur. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 68, 221-237. (89, 134) 
7. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): On vortex motion. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 25, 
217-260 = Papers 4, 13-66. (79, 88, 105, 106, 108, 128, 129, 297) 
1870 1. CLAUSIUS, R.: Über einen auf die Wärme anwendbaren mechanischen Satz. Ann. 
Physik u. Chem. (5) 21 = 141, 124-130. (219) 
2. LIPSCHITZ, R.: Fortgesetzte Untersuchung in Betreff der ganzen homogenen Funktionen von n Differentialen. J. reine angew. Math. 72, 1-65. (34) 
3. L:Evv, M.: Memoire sur les equations generales des mouvements interieurs des 
corps solides ductiles au dela des limites ou l'elasticite pourrait les ramener a leur 
premier etat. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 70, 1323-1325. (300) 
4. MAXWELL, J. C.: On reciprocal figures, frames, and diagrams of forces. Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Edinb. 26 (1869-1872), 1-40 = Papers 2, 161-207. (216, 224, 227) 
5. MAXWELL, J. C.: On the displacement in a case of fluid motion. Proc. Lond. 
Math. Soc. 3 (1869-1871), 82-87 = Papers 2, 208-214. (71) 
6. RANKINE, W. J. M.: On the thermodynamic theory of waves of finite longitudinal 
disturbance. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 160, 277-288 = Paptrs, 530-543. 
(183, 189, 205, 241, 297)) 
7. ST. VENANT, A.-J.-C. B. DE: Memoire sur l'etablissement des equations differentielles des mouvements interieurs operes dans les corps solides ductiles au dela 
des limites ou l'elasticite pourrait les ramener a leur premier etat. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 70, 473-480. (300) 
List of Works Cited. 753 
8. WARREN, J.: Note on a fundamental theorem in hydrodynamics. Quart. J. Math. 
10, 128-129. (101) 
1871 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Sui principi fondamentali della idrodinamica. Mem. Acad. Sei. 
Bologna (3) 1, 431-476; 2 (1872). 381-437; 3 (1873), 349-407; 5 (1874). 443-484 
= Richerche sulla cinematica dei fluidi. Opere 2, 202-379. (78, 82A, 83, 84. 
86, 101, 105, 129, 136) 
2. BoussiNESQ, J.: Etude nouvelle sur l'equilibre et le mouvement des corps solides 
elastiques dont certaines dimensions sont tres petites par rapport a d'autres. 
Premier Memoire. J. Math. pures appl. (2) 16, 125-240. (57) 
3. CHERBULIEZ, E.: Geschichtliche Mittheilungen aus dem Gebiete der mechanischen 
Wärmetheorie. Mittheil. Naturf. Ges. Bern 1870, 291-324. (240) 
4. DuRRANDE, H.: Extrait d'une theorie du deplacement d'une figure qui se deforme. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 73, 736-738. (82A) 
5. MAXWELL, J. C.: Theory of Heat. London. (252) 
6. STEFAN, J.: Über das Gleichgewicht und die Bewegung, insbesondere die Diffusion 
von Gasmengen. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien 632, 63-124. (158, 295) 
1872 1. BoussiNESQ, J.: Theorie des ondes liquides periodiques (1869). Mem. divers sav. 
20, 509-615. (210) 
2. Rapport sur un memoire deM. Kleitz intitule: .,Etudes sur !es forces moleculaires 
dans !es liquides en mouvement, et application a l'hydrodynamique" (ST. VENANT). 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 74, 426-438. (82A, 208) 
3. LIPSCHITZ, R.: Extrait d'une lettre. Bull. sei. math. astr. (1) 3, 349-352. (219) 
4. VILLARCEAU, Y.: Sur un nouveau theoreme de mecanique generale. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 75, 232-240. (219) 
1873 1. BoBYLEW, D.: Einige Betrachtungen über die Gleichungen der Hydrodynamik. 
Math. Ann. 6, 72-84. (211) 
2. GIBBS, J. W.: Graphical methods in the thermodynamics of fluids. Trans. Connecticut Acad. 2, 309-342 = Works 1, 1-32. (245, 247, 248, 265) 
3. GIBBS, J. W.: A method of geometrical representation of the thermodynamic 
properties of substances by means of surfaces. Trans. Connecticut Acad. 2, 
382-404 = Works 1, 33-54. (245, 246, 247) 
4. KLEITZ, C.: Etudes sur !es forces moleculaires dans !es liquides en mouvement et 
application al'hydrodynamique. Paris. (Cf. [1872, 2].) (82A, 110, 204, 208, 293). 
5. MAXWELL, J. C.: A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. 2 vols., Oxford. Cf. 
[1881, 4]. (175, 187, 200, 276, 311) 
6. STRUTT, J. W. (RAYLEIGH): Some general theorems relating to vibrations. Proc. 
Lond. Math. Soc. 4 (1871-1873). 357-368 = Papers 1, 170-181. (241A) 
1874 1. BoLTZMANN, L.: Zur Theorie der elastischen Nachwirkung. Sitzungsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien 702, 275-306 = Wiss. Abh. 1, 616-639. (305) 
2. MAXWELL, J. C.: V an d·~r Waals on the continuity of the gaseous and liquid states. 
Nature 10, 477-480 = Papers 2, 407-415. (219) 
3. MEYER, 0.-E.: Zur Theorie der inneren Reibung. J. reine angew. Math. 78, 130 
to 135. (305) 
4. MEYER, 0.-E.: Theorie der elastischen Nachwirkung. Ann. Physik (6) 1, 108-119. 
(305) 
5. NANSON, E. J.: Note on hydrodynamics. Mess. math. 3, 120-121. (75, 108) 
6. UMov, N.: Ableitung der Bewegungsgleichungen der Energie in continuirlichen 
Körpern. Z. Math. Phys. 19, 418-431. (217) 
187 5 1. GIBBS, J. W.: On the equilibrium of heterogeneaus substances. Trans. Connecticut 
Acad. 3 (1875-1878), 108-248, 343-524 = Works 1, 55-353. (14, 245, 246, 
247, 251, 260, 262, 264, 265) 
2. GREENHILL, A. G.: Hydromechanics. Encycl. Britt., 9th ed. (carried through 
14th ed., 1926). (99, 207) 
3. LIPSCHITZ, R.: Determinazione della pressione nell' intorno d'un fluido incompressibile soggetto ad attrazioni interne ed esterne. Ann. mat. (2) 6 (1873-1875). 
226-231. (102, 141) 
4. MAXWELL, J. C.: 4th. ed. of [1871, 5]. (245, 246) 
5. MEYER, 0.-E.: Zusatz zu der Abhandlung zur Theorie der inneren Reibung. J. reine 
angew. Math. 80, 315-316. (305) 
1876 1. CoTTERILL, J.: On the distribution of energy in a mass of liquid in a state of steady 
motion. Phil. Mag. 1, 108-111. (125) 
2. KIRCHHOFF, G.: Vorlesungen über mathematische Physik: Mechanik. Leipzig. 
2nd ed., 1877; 3rd ed., 1883. (57, 63A, 113, 129, 196, 200, 205, 214, 232, 236, 
301) 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 48 
754 C. TRUESDELL and R. ToUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
3. MASSIEU, F.: Memoire sur les fonctions caracteristiques de divers fluides et sur Ia 
theorie des vapeurs. Mem. divers savants 22, No. 2, 92 pp. (251) 
4. MAXWELL, J. C.: On the equilibrium of heterogeneaus substances. Repts. South 
Kensington conf. spec. loan coll. sei. app. 144-150 = (with a note added by 
LARMOR) Phil. Mag. (6) 16, 818-824 (1908). Condensed version, Proc. Cambridge 
Phil. Soc. 2, 427-430 (1876) =Papers 2, 498-500. (260) 
5. RIEMANN, B.: Commentatio mathematica, qua respondere tentatur quaestioni ab 
mma Academia Parisiensi propositae. Werke, 370-399 = Werke, 2nd ed. (1892), 
391-404. (34) 
6. TAIT, P. G.: Recent Advances in Physical Science. London. 1st and 2nd eds. 
(240) 
7. ZHUKOVSKI, N. E.: Kinematics of fluid bodies [in Russian]. Mat. Sborn. 8, 1-79. 
163-238 = repr. separ., Moscow 1876 = Sobr. Soch. 2, 7-144. (8, 12, 70, 102, 
108) 
1877 1. BoussiNESQ, J.: Sur la construction geometrique des pressions que supportent 
les divers elements plans se croisant en un meme point d'un corps, et sur celle 
des deformations qui se produisent autour d'un tel point. J. Math. pures appl. 
(3) 3, 147-152. (23, 35, 208) 
2. CHRISTOFFEL, E. B.: Untersuchungen über die mit dem Fortbestehen linearer partieller Differentialgleichungen verträglichen Unstetigkeiten. Ann. Mat. (2) 8, 
81-113 = Abh. 2, 51-80. (173, 177, 180, 183, 189, 205, 297) 
3. CHRISTOFFEL, E. B.: Über die Fortpflanzung von Stößen durch elastische feste 
Körper. Ann. Mat. (2) 8, 193-244 = Abh. 1, 81-126. (301) 
4. LAMB, H.: Note on a theorem in hydrodynamics. Mess. math. 7 (1877-1878), 
41-42. (76) - 5. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): Elasticity, Encycl. Britt., 9th ed. = (with reVisions) 
Papers 3, 1-112. The first part is a revision of [ 1865, 2]; the second part, a revision of [1856, 2]. (33A) 
1878 1. Reprint of [1824, 1], with the addition of MS notes of CARNOT (1824-1832) Paris. 
Trans!., R. H. THURSTON, Reflections on the Motive Power of Heat. New York 
1890; newed., NewYork 1943. Trans!., W. F. MAGIE, pp. 2-60 of The Second Law 
of Thermodynamics. N ew Y ork and London 1899. The most important portians 
of the MS notes = [1929, 8, pp. 33-34, 44]. (240) 
2. CLIFFORD, W. K.: Elements of Dynamic, an Introduction to the Study of Motion 
and Rest in Solid and Fluid Bodies, I. Kinematic. London. (86A) 
3. GILBERT, P.: Sur le probl~me de la composition des accelerations d'ordre quelconque. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 86, 1390-1391. (143) 
4. LAISANT, C.-A.: Note sur un theor~me sur les mouvements relatifs. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 87, 204-206. Cf. remarks on pp. 259 and 377. (143) 
5. LAMB, H.: On the conditions for steady motion of a fluid. Proc. Lond. Math. 
Soc. 9, (1877-1878). 91-92. (122, 125, 133) 
6. L:Evv, M.: Sur la composition des accelerations d'ordre quelconque et sur un problerne plus generale que celui de la composition des mouvements. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 86, 1068-1071. (143) 
7. MüLLER, J.: Einleitung in die Hydrodynamik. Vjschr. naturf. Ges. Zürich 23, 
129-159. 242-265. (107) 
8. NANSON, E. J.: Note on hydrodynamics. Mess. Math. 7 (for 1877-1878), 182-185. 
(20) 
1879 1. FoRSYTH, A. R.: On the motion of a viscous incompressible fluid. Mess. Math. 
9 (1879-1880), 134-139. (121) 
2. LAMB, H.: A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of the Motion of Fluids. Cambridge. (See [1895, 2], [1906, 4] [1916, 3], [1924, 9], [1932, 8].) (117, 122, 125) 
3. OBERDECK, A.: Über die Wärmeleitung der Flüssigkeiten bei Berücksichtigung 
der Strömungen infolge von Temperaturdifferenzen. Ann. Physik (2) 7, 271-292. 
(241) 
4. SHILLER, N.: Certain applications of the mechanical theory of heat to the changes 
of state of elastic bodies [in Russian]. Zh. Rus. Fiz.-Chim. Obsch. 11, Fiz. Otd. 
55-77. (246) 
1880 1. BoussiNESQ, J.: Sur la mani~re dont les frottements entrent en jeu dans un fluide 
qui sort de l'etat de repos, et sur leureffet pour empecher l'existence d'une fonction 
des vitesses. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 90, 736-739. (134) 
2. BousSINESQ, J.: Quelques considerations a l'appui d'une note du 29 mars, sur 
l'impossibilite d'admettre, en general, une fonction des vitesses danstaute question 
d'hydraulique ou les frottements ont un röle notable. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 9, 
967-969. (134) 
List of Works Cited. 755 
3. BRESSE, J.: Fonction des vitesses; extension des theoremes de Lagrange au cas 
d'un fluide imparfait. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 90, 501- 504. (134} 
4. BRESSE, J.: Reponse a une note de M.J.Boussinesq. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 90, 
857-858. (134) 
5. CRAIG, T.: Motion of viscous fluids. J. Franklin Inst. 110, 217-227. (121, 125) 
6. CRAIG, T.: On steady motion in an incompressible viscous fluid. Phi!. Mag. (5) 
10, 342-357- (125) 
7. CRAIG, T.: On certain possible cases of steady motion in a viscous fluid. Amer. 
J. Math. 3, 269-293. (121) 
8. FITZGERALD, G. F.: On the electromagnetic theory of the reflection and refraction 
of light. Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 171, 691 -711. (302) 
9. RoWLAND, H. A.: On the motion of a perfect incompressible fluid when no solid 
bodies are present. Amer. J. Math. 3, 226-268. (121) 
10. Sr. VENANT, A.-J .-C. B. DE: Geometrie cinematique. - Sur celle des deformations 
des corps soit elastiques, soit plastiques, soit fluides. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 90, 
53-56. 209. (8, 27) 
1881 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Sulle equazioni generali dell' elasticita. Ann. Mat. (2) 10 (1880 
-1882}, 188-211 = Opere 3, 383-407. (232, 238) 
2. CRAIG, T.: Methods and Results, General Properties of the Equations of Steady 
Motion. U.S. Treasury Dept. (Coast and Geod. Survey) Document 71, Washington. 
(122, 136) 
3. HILL, M. J. M.: Some properties of the equations of hydrodynamics. Quart. J. 
Math. 17, 1-20, 168-174. (66, 136 136A, 137) 
4. MAXWELL, J. C.: 2nd ed. of [1873, 5]. (175, 187, 276) 
1882 •: 1. HELMHOLTZ, H.: Zur Geschichte der Entdeckung des Gesetzes von der Erhaltung 
der Kraft. Abh. 1, 71-74. (240) 
2. HELMHOL TZ, H.: Die Thermodynamik chemischer Vorgänge. Sitzgsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Berlin 1882, 22-39 = Abh. 2, 958-978. (246, 249, 251, 263, 265) 
3. MoHR, 0.: Über die Darstellung des Spannungszustandes und des Deformationszustandes eines Körperelementes und über die Anwendung derselben in der Festigkeitslehre. Civilingenieur 28, 112-155. (24) 
4. VorGT, W.: Allgemeine Formeln für die Bestimmung der Elasticitätsconstanten 
von Krystallen durch die Beobachtung der Biegung und Drillung von Prismen. 
Ann. Physik {2) 16, 273-321, 398-416. (224) 
1884 J. GrLBERT, P.: Abstract. Ann. Soc. Sei. Bruxelles 8 {1883-1884}, A53-A56. (143} 
1885 1. BoBYLEW, D.: Über die relative Bewegung eines Punktes in einem in continuirlicher Deformation begriffenen Medium. Z. Math. Phys. 30, 336-344. (144) 
2. HrLL, M. J. M.: The differential equations of cylindrical annular vortices. Proc. 
Lond. Math. Soc. 16 {1884-1885). 171-183. (161, 162) 
3. HuGONIOT, H.: Sur Ia propagation du mouvement dans un fluide indefini (Premiere 
Partie). C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 101, 1118-1120. (177, 180, 181, 183, 190, 297) 
4. HuGONIOT, H.: Sur Ia propagation du mouvement dans un fluide indefini (Deuxieme 
Partie). C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 101, 1229-1232. (177, 181, 182, 183, 190, 246, 297) 
5. LAMB, H.: Proof of a hydrodynamical theorem. Mess. Math. 14, 87-92. (138) 
6. MoRERA, G.: Sulle equazioni generali per l'equilibrio dei sistemi continui a tre 
dimensioni. Atti Accad. Sei. Torino 20 (1884-1885), 43-53. (205A) 209, 232) 
7. SoMOFF, P.: Über einen Satz von Burmester. Z. Math. Phys. 30, 248-250. (74) 
8. THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN}: On the motion of a liquid within an ellipsoidal 
hollow. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 13, 114, 370-378 = Papers 4, 193-201. (70) 
1886 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Sull' interpretazione meccanica delle formale di Maxwell. Mem. 
Accad. Sei. Bologna {4} 7, 1-38 = Opere 4, 190-223. (57) 
2. DUHEM, P.: Le Potentiel Thermodynamique et ses Applications a Ia Mecanique 
Chimique et a l'etude des phenomenes electriques. Paris: Hermann. (246, 252, 
260) 
3. HuGONIOT, H.: Sur un theoreme general relatif a la propagation du mouvement. 
C.R. Acad. Sei., Paris 102, 858-860. (194A, 301) 
4. ToDHUNTER, 1., and K. PEARSON: A History of the Theory of Elasticity and of 
the Strength of Materials from Galilei to the Present Time, 1. Cambridge. (21, 
33A, 45, 204, 205A, 232) 
188 7 1. HuGoNroT, H.: Memoire sur Ia propagation du mouvement dans !es corps et specialerneut dans !es gaz parfaits. J. Ecole Polytech. 57, 3-97; 58, 1-125 (1889). The 
date of the memoir is 26 October 1885. (180, 205, 241, 297) 
2. HuGONIOT, H.: Memoire sur Ia propagation du mouvement dans un fluide indefini. 
J. Math. pures appl. (4} 3, 477-492; {4) 4, 153-167. (183, 190, 194A, 297) 
48* 
756 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1888 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
PLANCK, M.: Über das Princip der Vermehrung der Entropie. Dritte Abhandlung. 
Ann. Physik (2) 32, 162-503. (264) 
REIFF, R.: Zur Kinematik der Potentialbewegung. Math. naturw. Mitt. (Tübingen) 
13 (1884-1886). 41-48. (88) 
VorGT, W.: Theoretische Studien über die Elasticitätsverhältnisse der Krystalle. 
Abh. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen 34, 100 pp. (200, 217) 
BASSET, A. B.: A Treatise on Hydrodynamics, 2 vols. Cambridge. (99, 125, 136, 
136A, 137, 162) 
BRILLOUIN, M.: Chaleur specifique pour une transformation quelconque et thermodynamique. J. phys. theor. appl. (2) 7, 148-152. (250) 
BRILLOUIN, M.: Deformations permanentes et thermodynamique. J. phys. theor. 
appl. (2) 7, 327-347; 8, 169-179 (1889). Much of the first part appears in C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 106, 416-418, 482-485, 537-540, 589-592. (250) 
DoNATI, L.: Sul lavoro di deformazione dei sistemi elastici. Mem. Accad. Sei. 
Bologna (4) 9, 345-367. (205) 
GrLBERT, P.: Sur !es composantes des accelerations d'ordre quelconque suivant 
trois directions rectangulaires variables. J. Math. pures appl. (4) 4, 465-473. (143) 
LovE, A. E. H.: The small free vibrations and deformation of a thin elastic shell. 
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 179, 491-546. (212) 
Rrccr, G.: Delle derivazioni covarianti e controvarianti e delloro uso nella analisi 
applicata. Studi Univ. Fadova comm. ottavo centenar. Univ. Bologna 3, No. 12, 
23 pp. (84) 
RrECKE, E.: Beiträge zur Hydrodynamik. Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen, 347-357 
= Ann. Physik (2) 36, 322-334 (1889). (71) 
1889 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Considerazione idrodinamiche. Rend. Ist. Lombardo (2) 22, 
121-130 = Opere 4, 300-309. (99) 
1890 
1891 
2. BELTRAMI, E.: Sur Ia theorie de Ia deformation infiniment petite d'un milieu. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 108, 502-504 = Opere 4, 344-347. (57) 
3. GrLBERT, P.: Recherehes sur les accelerations en general. Ann. Soc. Sei. Bruxelles 
13,261-315. (143) 
4. LEONARDO DA V IN er: Les ... manuscrits F and I de Ia bibliotheque de l'institut 
publies en fac-similes phototypiques ... , ed. RAVAISSON-MOLLIEN. Paris. (70) 
5. LIPPMANN, M.: Cours de Thermodynamique. Paris. (240) 
6. MoRERA, G.: Sui moti elicoidali dei fluidi. Rend. Lincei (4) 5, 511-617. (99, 112) 
7. PADOVA, E.: Sulle deformazioni infinitesimi. Rend. Lincei (4) 51, 174-178. (34, 
57) 
8. PorNCARE, H.: Let;:ons sur la Theorie Mathematique de la Lumiere, redigees par 
J. BLONDIN. Paris. (233) 
9. VOIGT, W.: Ueber adiabatische Elasticitätsconstanten. Ann. Physik 36, 743-7 59. 
(256A, 296) 
10. VorGT, W.: Über die innere Reibung der festen Körper, insbesondere der Krystalle. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Abh. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen 36, No. 1. (305) 
BASSET, A. B.: On the extension and flexure of cylindrical and spherical thin 
elastic shells. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 181, 433-480. (213) 
GrLBERT, PH.: Sur quelques formules d'un usage general dans la physique mathematique. Ann. Soc. Sei. Bruxelles 14, 1-18. (99) 
GosrEWSKI, W.: 0 eisnieniu kinetycznem w plynie nieseisliwym i jednorodnym. 
Pami~tnik Akad. Krakow, mat.-przyr. 17, 128-134. (121) 
GosiEWSKI, W.: 0 naturze ruchu wewna,trz elementu plynnego. Pami~tnik Akad. 
Krakow, mat.-przyr. 17, 135-142. (86, 88) 
Is:E, E.: Sulla deformazione elastica di un corpo isotropo. Atti Accad. Pontaniana 
20, 241-260. (42) 
LAMB, H.: On the deformation of an elastic shell. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 21, 
119-146. (212, 213) 
LEVY, M.: L'hydrodynamique moderne et l'hypothese des actions a distance. Rev. 
Gen. sei. pures appl. 1, 721-728. (86, 107, JIJ8, 109, 110) 
PADOVA, E.: 11 potenzialedelleforze elastiche di mezzi isotropi. Atti Ist. Veneto 
sei. lett. arte 48 = (7) 1, 445-451. (61) 
BRILLOUIN, M.: Deformations homogenes finies. Energie d'un corps isotrope. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 112, 1500-1502. (36) 
DUHEM, P.: Sur les equations gem\rales de la thermodynamique (1888). Ann. 
Ecole Norm. (3) 8, 231-266. (246) 
DuHEM, P.: Hydrodynamique, Elasticite, Acoustique, Paris: Hermann, 2 vols. 
(194A, 241) 
List of Works Cited. 757 
4. NATANSON, L.: Thermodynamische Bemerkungen. Ann. Phys. 278 = (2) 42, 
178-185. (251, 252) 
5. SAMPSON, R. A.: On Stokes' current function. Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 182, 
449-518. (162) 
1892 1. BASSET, A. B.: On the theory of elastic wires. Proc. Land. Math. Soc. 23 
(1891-1892), 105-127. (214) 
2. BELTRAMI, E.: Osservazioni sulla nota precendente. Rend. Lincei (5) 11 , 141-142 
= Opere 4, 510-512. (227) 
3. DUHEM, P.: Commentaire aux principes de Ia thermodynamique, Premiere partie. 
]. math. pures appl. (4) 8, 269-330. (240) 
4. FINGER, J.: Über die gegenseitigen Beziehungen gewisser in der Mechanik mit 
Vortheil anwendbaren Flächen zweiter Ordnung nebst Anwendung auf Probleme 
der Astatik. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien (IIa) 101, 1105-1142. (14, 21, 22, 
29, 30, 37) 
5. HELMHOLTZ, H.: Das Princip der kleinsten Wirkung in der Elektrodynamik. 
Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Berlin 1892,459-475 = Ann. Phys. (2) 47, 1-26 = Abh. 
3, 476-504. (150) 
6. KILLING, W.: Über die Grundlagen der Geometrie. J. reine angew. Math. 109, 
121-186. (84) 
7. LARMOR, J.: The equations of propagation of disturbances in gyrostatically loaded 
media, and of the circular polarization of light. Proc. Land. Math. Soc. 23 
(1891-1892), 127-135 = Papers 2, 248-255· (200) 
8. LovE, A. E. H.: A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, vol. 1. 
Cambridge. (See [1906, 5] [1927, 6].) (31, 35, 36, 39, 44, 45, 46, 205) 
9. MORERA, G.: Soluzione generale delle equazioni indefinite dell' equilibrio di un 
corpo continuo. Rend. Lincei (5) 11 , 137-141. (227) 
10. MoRERA, G.: Appendice alla Nota: Sulla soluzione piu generale delle equazioni 
indefinite dell' equilibrio di un corpo continuo. Rend. Lincei (5) 11 , 233-234. (227) 
11. POINCARE, H.: Lec,:ons sur la Theorie de l'Elasticite. Paris. (55, 205, 210, 233) 
12. VoiGT, W.: Ueber innere Reibung fester Körper, insbesondere der Metalle. Ann. 
Phys. (2) 47, 671-693. (305) 
13. VoiGT, W.: Bestimmung der Constanten der Elasticität und Untersuchung der 
inneren Reibung für einige Metalle. Gött. Abh. 38, No. 2. (305) 
14. WIEN, W.: Über den Begriff der Localisirung der Energie. Ann. Phys. (2) 47, 
1-26 = Abh. 3, 476-504. (157, 217) 
1893 1. DuHEM, P.: Le potentiel thermodynamique et Ia pression hydrostatique. Ann. 
Ecole Norm. (3) 10, 187-230. (60, 215, 241, 245, 247) 
2. DUHEM, P.: Dissolutionset melanges. Trav. Mem. Fac. Lilie 3, Nos. 2 and 12. (215, 
255, 265, 295) 
3. DUHEM, P.: Commentaire aux principes de la thermodynamique, Deuxieme partie. 
]. Math. pures appl. (4) 9, 293-359. (245) 
4. HEAVISIDE, 0.: Electromagnetic Theory, vol. 1. London. (302) 
5. LovE, A. E. H.: A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, vol. 2. 
Cambridge. (See [1906, 5] [1927, 6].) (63A, 212, 213) 
6. PoiNCARE, H.: Lec,:ons sur Ia Theorie des Tourbillons. Paris. (106, 107, 109, 117, 
122, 125, 134, 145) 
7. TaucHE, P.: Transformation des equations generales du mouvement des fluides. 
Bull. Soc. Math. France 21, 72-7 5. (99) 
1894 1. CuRIE, P.: Sur la symetrie dans !es phenomenes physiques, symetrie d'un champ 
electrique et d'un champ magnetique. J. Physique (3) 3, 393-415 =Oeuvres 
118-141. (258) 
2. DuHEM, P.: Commentaire aux principes de Ia thermodynamiques, Troisieme partie. 
]. Math. pures appl. (4) 10, 207-285. (246, 249, 265) 
3. FABRI, C.: I moti vorticosi di ordine superioreal prima in relazione alle equazioni 
pel movimento dei fluidi viscosi. Mem. Accad. Sei. Bologna (5) 4, 383-392. (123) 
4. FINGER, J.: Über die allgemeinsten Beziehungen zwischen Deformationen und den 
zugehörigen Spannungen in aeolotropen und isotropen Substanzen. Sitzgsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien (IIa) 103, 1073-1100. (29, 30, 303) 
5. KIRCHHOFF, G.: Vorlesungen über die Theorie der Wärme. Leipzig: Teubner. 
X + 210 pp. (241) 
6. METZLER, W. H.: Homogeneaus strains. Ann. of Math. 8, 148-156. (42) 
7. NEUMANN, C.: Über die Bewegung der Wärme in compressiblen oder auch incompressiblen Flüssigkeiten. Ber. Verh. Ges. Wiss. Leipzig 46, 1-24. (241) 
8. SHILLER, N.: On the problern of the thermodynamic potential [in Russian]. Isv. 
imp. Obschestva Moskov. Univ. 7, No. 1, 22-31. (246) 
758 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
1895 1. BASSETT, A. B.: On the deformationofthin elastic wires. Amer. ~- Math. 17, 
281-317. (214) 
2. LAMB, H.: Hydrodynamics. Cambridge. (2nd ed. of [1879. 2], see [1906, 4], [1916, 
3], [1924, 9], [1932, 8].) (94, 106, 108) 
3. OuMOFF, N.: Une expression gem\rale du potentiel thermodynamique. Bull. Soc. 
Imper. Naturalistes de Moscou (2) 8 (1894), 138-145. (246) 
4. PAINLEVE, P.: Le~ons sur l'Integration des Equations Differentielles de la mecanique et applications. 291 pp. Paris: Hermann. (Lithographed.) (167, 170) 
5. ScHÜTZ, ] . R.: Über die Herstellung von Wirbelbewegungen in idealen Flüssigkeiten durch conservative Kräfte. Ann. Physik (N. F.) 56, 144-147. (108) 
6. ToucHE, P.: Equation d'une trajectoire fluide. Bull. Soc. Math. France 23, 
111-113. (108) 
7. VOIGT, W.: Über Medien ohne innere Kräfte und eine durch sie gelieferte mechanische Deutung der Maxwell-Hertz'schen Gleichungen. Gött. Abh. 1894, 72-79-
(200) 
8. VoiGT, W.: Kompendium der theoretischen Physik 1. Leipzig. (256A, 296) 
1896 1. CossERAT, E. et F.: Sur la theorie de l'elasticite. Ann. Toulouse 10, 1-116. 
(12, 14, 26, -31, 46, 67, 69, 96, 210, 217) 
2. DuHEM, P.: Sur les deformations permanentes et l'hysteresis, Parts I-V. Mem. 
Couronn. Mem. Sav. Etrangers Acad. Belg. 54, 56 ( 1898); 62 ( 1902). (250) 
3. MAcH, E.: Die Prinzipien der Wärmelehre historisch-kritisch entwickelt. Leipzig: 
Johann Ambrosius Barth. (240, 246, 253) 
1897 1. APPELL, P.: Sur les equations de l'hydrodynamique et la theoriedes tourbillons. 
]. Math. pures appl. (5) 3, 5-16. (108, 129, 135) 
2. FERRARIS, G.: Teoria geometrica dei campi vettoriali come introduzione allo studio 
della elettricita, del magnetismo, ecc. Mem. Accad. Sei. Torino (2) 47, 259-338. 
(175) 
3. FINGER, ] . : Über das innere Virial eines elastischen Körpers. Sitzgsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien (IIa) 106, 722-738. (219) 
4. FöPPL, A.: Die Geometrie der Wirbelfelder. Leipzig. (93, 118, 129) 
6. MEHMKE, R.: Zum Gesetz der elastischen Dehnungen. Z. Math. Phys. 42, 327-338. 
(26, 33A) 
6. MILLER, W. L.: On the second differential coefficients of Gibbs' function C. The 
vapour tensions, freezing and boiling points of ternary mixtures. ] . Phys. Chem. 
1, 633-642. (252) 
7. NEUMANN, C.: Die Anwendung des Hamilton'schen Princips in der Hydrodynamik 
und Aerodynamik. Ber. Verh. Ges. Wiss. Leipzig 94, 611-615. (160) 
8. ToucHE, P.: Equations d'une trajectoire fluide dans le cas general. Bull. Soc. 
Math. France 27, 5-8. (108) 
9. TREVOR, J. E.: Inner thermodynamic equilibria. J. Phys. Chem. 1, 205-220. 
(2/j]) 
1898 1. BJERKNES, V.: Über die Bildung von Circulationsbewegungen und Wirbeln in 
reibungslosen Flüssigkeiten. Vidensk. Skrift. No. 5. (170) 
2. DUHEM, P.: On the general problern of chemical statics. ] . Phys. Chem. 2, 1-42, 
91-115. (266) 
1899 1. APPELL, P.: Lignes correspondentes dans la deformation d'un milieu; extension 
des theoremes sur les tourbillons. ]. Math. pures appl. (5) 5, 137-153. Abstract 
in Bull. Soc. Math. France 26, 135-136 (1898). (132) 
2. BROCA, A.: Sur le principe de l'egalite de l'action et de la reaction. c. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 129, 1016-1019. (176) 
3. VOLTERRA, V.: Sul flusso di energia meccanica. Atti Accad. Sei. Torino 34 
(1898-1899). 366-375- (217) 
4. VoLTERRA, V.: Sul flusso di energia meccanica. Nuovo Cim. (4) 10, 337-359· 
(209) 
1900 1. BRILLOUIN, M.: Theorie moleculaire des gaz. Diffusion du mouvement et de l'energie. 
Ann. chimie (7) 20, 440-485. (293) 
2. BRocA, A.: Sur les masses vectorielles de discontinuite. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
130, 317-319. (175) 
3. DuHEM, P.: Sur le theoreme d'Hugoniot et quelques theoremes analogues. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 131, 1171-1173. (180, 181, 187) 
4. HERTZ, H.: Electric Waves. London. (276) 
5. HILBERT, D.: Mathematische Probleme. Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen 1900, 253 
-297. Repr. with addns., Arch. Math. Phys. 1, 44-63, 213-217 (1901). Transl. 
with addns., Sur les problemes futurs des mathematiques. C. R. 2me Congr. Int. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
1901 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
1902 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
List of Works Cited. 759 
:Math. Paris (1900). 58-114 (1902). Trans!., Mathematical problems. Bull. Amer. 
Math. Soc. (2) 8, 437-479 (1902). (3) 
MICHELL, J. H.: On the direct determination of stress in an elastic solid, with 
applications to the theory of plates. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 31 (1899), 100-124. 
(224) 
MICHELL, J. H.: The uniform torsion and flexure of incomplete tores, with application to helical springs. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 31, (1899) 130-146. (228) 
MoHR, 0.: Welche Umstände bedingen die Elastizitätsgrenze und den Bruch eines 
Materials? Z. VDI 44, 1524-1530. (24) 
STRUTT, J. W. (Lord RAYLEIGH): On a theorem analogaus to the virial theorem. 
Phi!. Mag. (5) 50, 210-213 =Papers 4, 491-493. (216) 
VIEILLE, P.: Etude sur le röle des discontinuites dans !es phenomenes de propagation. Mem. poudres salpetres 10 (1899-1900), 177-260. (297) 
ZoRAWSKI, K.: Über die Erhaltung der Wirbelbewegung. C. R. Acad. Sei. Cracovie, 
335-341. (7·5, 80, 107, 153) 
ZoRAWSKI, K.: Über gewisse Änderungsgeschwindigkeiten von Linienelementen 
bei der Bewegung eines continuirlichen materiellen Systems. C. R. Acad. Sei. 
Cracovie, 367-374. (78, 153) 
ABRAHAM, M.: Geometrische Grundbegriffe. Enz. math. Wiss. 43, 3-47. (163) 
APPELL, P.: Deformation speciale d'un milieu continu; tourbillans de divers ordres. 
Bull. Soc. Math. France 29, 16-17. (20) 
DARBOUX, G.: Sur !es deformations finies et sur !es systemes triples de surfaces 
orthogonales. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 32 (1900), 377-383. (38) 
DUHEM, P.: Sur !es equations de l'hydrodynamique. Ann. Toulouse (2) 3, 253 
to 279. (99, 136) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur Ia condition supplementaire en hydrodynamique. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 132, 117-120. (241) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur !es theoremes d'Hugoniot, !es lemmes de M. Hadamard et Ia propagation des ondes dans !es fluides visqueux. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 132, 1163-1167. 
(181, 298) 
DuHEM, P.: Recherehes sur l'hydrodynamique. Ann. Taulause (2) 3, 315-377, 
379-431; 4 (1902), 101-169; 5 (1903). 5-61, 197-255. 353-404 = repr. separ. 
Paris, 2 vols., 1903, 1904. (113, 134, 181, 241, 246, 256, 258, 262, 297, 298) 
HADAMARD, J.: Sur Ia propagationdes ondes. Bull. Soc. Math. France 29, 50-60. 
(134, 173, 176, 177, 181, 183, 187, 190) 
J ouGUET, E.: Sur Ia propagation des discontinuites dans !es fluides. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 132, 673-676. (189, 205, 241, 258) 
MUIRHEAD, R. F.: Stress - its definition. Nature, Land. 64, 207. (200) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur !es lois de Ia viscosite. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 95-111. 
(305) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur Ia double refraction accidentelle dans !es liquides. Bull. Int. 
Acad. Sei. Cracovie 161-171. (305) 
NATANSON, L.: Über die Gesetze der inneren Reibung. Z. physik. Chem. 38, 690 
-704. (305) 
RICCI, G., et T. LEVI-CIVITA: Methades de calcul differentiel absolu et leurs applications. Math. Ann. 54, 125-137. (205A) 
WEINGARTEN, G.: Sulle superficie di discontinuita nella teoria della elasticita dei 
corpi solidi. Rend. Accad. Lincei (5) 101, 57-60. (49, 175) 
WEINGARTEN, J.: Über die geometrischen Bedingungen, denen die Unstetigkeiten 
der Derivierten eines Systems dreier stetigen Funktionen des Ortes unterworfen 
sind, und ihre Bedeutung in der Theorie der Wirbelbewegung. Arch. Math. Phys. 
(3) 1, 27-33. (106, 175) 
ZoRAWSKI, K.: Über gewisse Änderungsgeschwindigkeiten von Linienelementen 
bei der Bewegung eines continuierlichen materiellen Systems, 2. Mitth. Bull. Int. 
Acad. Sei. Cracovie 486-499· (86) 
BJERKNES, V.: Cirkulation relativ zu der Erde. Meteor. Z. 37, 97-108. (145) 
CoMBEBIAC, G.: Sur !es equations generales de l'elasticite. Bull. Soc. Math. France 
30, 108-110, 242-247. (200, 217) 
CouLoN, J.: Sur !'Integration des Equations aux Derivees Partielles du Second 
Ordre per la Methode des Caracteristiques. Paris: Hermann. 122 pp. (175, 176, 
180, 181) 
HELMHOLTZ, H.: Vorlesungen über theoretische Physik, 2, Dynamik continuirlich 
verbreiteter Massen. Leipzig (lectures of 1894). (4, 6) 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): A new specifying method for stress and strain in 
an elastic solid. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 24 (1901-1903), 97-101 = Phil. Mag. 
760 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
1903 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
6. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
16. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
1904 1. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
(6) 3, 444-448 = Math. Phys. Papers 4, 556-560. Prelim. note, Phi!. Mag. (6} 
3, 95-97. (33A) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur Ia propagation d'un petit mouvement dans un fluide visqueux. 
Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 19-35. (306) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur Ia fonction dissipative d'un fluide visqueux. Bull. Int. Acad. 
Sei. Cracovie, 488-494. (306) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur Ia deformation d'un disque plastico-visqueux. Bull. Int. Acad. 
Sei. Cracovie, 494-512. (306) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur Ia conductibilite calorifique d'un gaz en mouvement. Bull. 
Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 137-146. (306} 
ZERMELO, E.: Hydrodynamische Untersuchungen über die Wirbelbewegungen in 
einer Kugelfläche. Z. Math. Phys. 47, 201-237. (162) 
APPELL, P.: Sur quelques fonctions de point dans Je mouvement d'un fluide. J. 
Math. pures appl. (5) 9, 5-19. An abstract is given in C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
136, 186-187 (1903). (101, 102) 
APPELL, P.: Sur quelques fonctions et vecteurs de point contenarrt uniquement 
!es derivees premieres des composantes de Ia vitesse. Bull. Soc. Math. France 31, 
68-73. (90, 101) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur quelques formules de cinematique utiles dans Ia theorie generale 
de l'elasticite. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 136, 139-141. (82A} 
DuHEM, P.: Sur Ia viscosite en un milieu vitreux. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 136, 
281-283. (262, 306) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur !es equations du mouvement et Ia relation supplementaire au 
sein d'un milieu vitreux. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 136, 343-345. (241, 262) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur Je mouvement des milieux vitreux, affectes de viscosite, et tres 
peu deformes. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 136, 592-595. (306) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur !es ondes au sein d'un milieu vitreux, affecte de viscosite et tres 
peu deforme. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 136, 733-735- (306} 
DuHEM, P.: Des ondes du premierordre par rapport a Ia vitesse au sein d'un milieu 
vitreux doue de viscosite, et affecte de mouvements finis. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
136, 858-860. (306} 
DuHEM, P.: Des ondes du second ordre par rapport a Ia vitesse au sein des milieux 
vitreux, doues de viscosite, et affectes de mouvements finis. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 136, 1032-1034. (306) 
DuHEM, P.: Sur une generalisation du theoreme de Reech. Proces-Yerbaux Soc. 
Sei. Bordeaux 1902-1903, 65-73. (262) 
HADAMARD, J.: Le~ons sur Ja Propagation des Ondes et !es Equations de l'Hydrodynamique (lectures of 1898-1900). Paris. (20, 66, 86, 88, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 218, 241, 246, 
297, 301) 
NATANSON, L.: Über einige von Herrn B. Weinstein zu meiner Theorie der inneren 
Reibung gemachten Bemerkungen. Physik. Z. 4, 541-543. (306) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur l'application des equations de Lagrange dans Ia theorie de Ia 
viscosite. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie, 268-283. (306) 
NATANSON, L.: Sur l'approximation de certaines equations de Ia theorie de Ia 
viscosite. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie, 283-311. (306) 
REYNOLDS, 0.: The Sub-Mechanics of the Universe. Papers 3. (81, 168, 169, 
216, 243) 
STEPHANSEN, E.: Von der Bewegung eines Continuums mit einem Ruhepunkte. 
Arch. math. og naturv. 25, No. 6, 29 pp. (70) 
ZAREMBA, s.: Remarques sur !es travaux de M. Natanson relatifs a Ia theorie de Ia 
viscosite. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 85-93. (306) 
ZAREMBA, S.: Sur une generalisation de Ia theorie classique de Ia viscosite. Bull. 
Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 380-403. (266, 306} 
ZAREMBA, S.: Sur un problerne d'hydrodynamique lie a un cas double refraction 
accidentale dans !es liquides et sur !es considerations theoriques de M. Natanson 
relatives a ce phenomene. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 403-423. (306) 
ZAREMBA, S.: Sur une forme perfectionee de Ia theorie de Ia relaxation. Bull. 
Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 594-614. (148, 293, 306) 
ZAREMBA, S.: Le principe des mouvements relatifs et !es equations de Ia mecanique 
physique. Reponse a M. Natanson. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie 614-621. (148, 
160, 293) 
DuHEM, P.: Recherehes sur l'elasticite. Ann. Ecole Norm. (3) 21, 99-139. 375-414; 
22 (1905), 143-217; 23 (1906}, 169-223 = repr. separ., Paris 1906. (96, 200, 
262, 301, 306) 
List of Works Cited. 761 
2. DuHEM, P.: Sur Ia stabilite de l'equilibre en thermodynamique et !es reeherehes de 
J. W. Gibbs au sujet de ee probleme. Proees-Verbaux Soe. Sei. Bordeaux 1903-
1904, 112-121. (245, 246, 265) 
3. J OUGUET, E.: Remarques sur la propagation des pereussions dans les gaz. C. R. 
Aead. Sei., Paris 138, 1685-1688. (258) 
4. LovE, A. E. H.: Wave-motions with diseontinuities at wave-fronts. Proe. Lond. 
Math. Soe. (2) 1, 37-62. (180) 
5. MANVILLE, 0.: Sur Ia deformation finie d'un milieu eontinu. Mem. soe. sei. Bordeaux 
(6) 2, 83-162. According to SrGNORINI [1943, 6; Chap. I, ~ 1], this paper is not 
exempt from errors. (34) 
6. SAUREL, P.: On the stability of the equilibrium of a homogeneous phase. J. Phys. 
Chem. 8, 325-334. (265) 
7. SAUREL, P.: On the stability of equilibrium of bivariant systems. J. Phys. Chem. 
8, 436-439. (265) 
8. WHITTAKER, E. T.: A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid 
Bodies; with an Introducbon to the Problem of Three Bodies. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. xiii + 414 pp. (99) 
1905 1. HADAMARD, J.: Remarque sur Ia note deM. Gyczö Zemph~n. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 141, 713. (258) 
2. J AUMANN, G.: Die Grundlagen der Bewegungslehre von einem modernen Standpunkte aus. Leipzig. (8, 12, 66 B, 79, 80, 81, 107) 
3. KLEIN, F., u. K. WIEGHARDT: Über Spannungsflächen und reziproke Diagramme, 
mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Maxwell'schen Arbeiten. Arch. Math. Phys. 
(3) 8, 1-10,95-119. (227) 
4. MARCOLONGO, R.: Le formule del Saint-Venant per le deformazioni finite. Rend. 
Circ. Nat. Palermo 19, 151-155. (34) 
5. RrgurER, C.: Sur l'integration d'un systeme d'equations aux derivees partielles 
auquel conduit l'etude des deformations finies d'un milieu continu. Ann. Ecole 
Norm. (3) 22, 475-538. (34) 
6. VoLTERRA, V.: Sull'equilibrio dei corpi elastici piu volte connessi. Rend. Accad. 
Lineei 141, 193-202. (49, 185) 
7. ZEMPLEN, G.: Kriterien für die physikalische Bedeutung der unstetigen Lösungen 
der hydrodynamischen Bewegungsgleichungen. Math. Ann. 61, 437-449. (7, 9, 193, 
205, 236A) 
8. ZEMPLEN, G.: Sur l'impossibilite des ondes de choc negatives dans les gaz. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 141, 710-712. (258) 
9. ZEMPLEN, G.: Besondere Ausführungen über unstetige Bewegungen in Flüssigkeiten. Enz. math. Wiss. IV 3, art. 19. (172, 205, 236A, 241) 
1906 1. CAFIERO, D.: La deformazione finita di un mezzo continuo. Atti Accad. Peloritana 
21, 179-228. (12, 34, 42, 44, 45) 
2. CESARO, E.: Sulle formale del Volterra, fondamentali nella teoria delle distorsioni 
elastiehe. Rend. Aeead. Napoli (3 a) 12, 311-321. (57, 175) 
3. CrsoTTr, U.: Sul paradosso di d'Alembert. Atti Accad. Veneto 65, 1291-1295. 
(202) 
4. LAMB, H.: 3rd ed. of [1879. 2]. (See [1895. 2], [1916, 3], [1924, 8], [1932, 9].) (99, 
136) 
5. LovE, A. E. H.: 2nd ed. of [1892, 8] and [1893, 5]. (12, 27, 41, 45, 195, 214, 218, 
228, 301) 
6. MüLLER, C. H., u. A. TrMPE: Die Grundgleichungen der mathematischen Elastizitätstheorie. Enz. math. Wiss. IV4 , art. 23, 1-54. (231, 256A) 
1907 1. CossERAT, E. et F.: Sur la mecanique generale. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 145, 
1139-1142. (60) 
2. CossERAT, E. et F.: Sur Ia statique de Ia ligne deformable. C. R. Aead. Sei., 
Paris 145, 1409-1412. (214) 
3. HrLBERT, D.: Mechanik der Continua, lectures of 1906-1907; MS notes by A. R. 
CRATHORNE in Univ. Illinois Library. (9, 158, 256) 
4. HrLBERT, D.: ibid., more complete MS notes by W. MARSHALL in Purdue Univ. 
Library. (9, 158, 245, 256) 
5. LoRENTZ, H. A.: Über die Entstehung turbulenter Flüssigkeitsbewegungen und 
über den Einfluß dieser Bewegung bei der Strömung durch Röhren. Abh. theor. 
Phys. 43-71. (207) 
6. NEUMANN, E. R.: Über eine neue Reduktion bei hydrodynamischen Problemen. 
]. reine angew. Math. 132, 189-215. (224, 225) 
7. VoLTERRA, V.: Sur l'equilibre des corps elastiques multiplement connexes. Ann. 
Ecole Norm. (3) 24, 401-517. (57) 
762 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
8. WILSON, E. B.: Oblique reflections and unimodular strains. Trans. Amer. Math. 
Soc. 8, 270-298. (46) 
1908 1. CossERAT, E. et F.: Sur la statique de la surface deformable et la dynamique 
de la ligne deformable. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 146, 68-71. (63A, 64) 
2. CossERAT, E. et F.: Sur la theorie des corps minces. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
146, 169-172. (60) 
3. EINSTEIN, A., u. ]. LAUB: Über die elektromagnetischen Grundgleichungen für 
bewegte Körper. Ann. Physik, 26, 532-540. (308) 
4. HAMEL, G.: Über die Grundlagen der Mechanik. Math. Ann. 66, 350-397. (2, 
231) 
5. HARGREAVES, R.: On integral forms and their connection with physical equations. 
Cambr. Phil. Trans. 21, 107. (266, 270) 
6. PLANCK, M.: Bemerkungen zum Prinzip der Aktion und Reaktion in der allgemeinen 
Dynamik. Verh. dtsch. phys. Ges. 10, 728-732. (289) 
1909 1. ABRAHAM, M.: Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper. Rend. Palermo 28, 1-28. 
(80, 279) 
1910 
1911 
2. BRILL, A.: Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Mechanik raumerfüllender Massen. 
Leipzig u. Berlin. x + 236 pp. (8, 237) 
3. CARATHEODORY, C.: Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Thermodynamik. 
Math. Annalen 67, 355-386. (245) 
4. CISOTTI, U.: Sul moto di un solido in un canale. Rend. Palermo 28, 307-3 51. 
(202) 
5. CossERAT, E. et F.: Theorie des Corps DMormables. Paris= pp. 953-1173 of 
0. D. CHWOLSON, Traite de Physique, transl. E. DAVAUX, 2nd ed., 2. Paris 1909. 
(12, 60, 61, 63A, 64, 200, 210, 212, 214, 217, 238, 256) 
6. GIBBS, J. W., and E. B. WILSON: Vector Analysis. New Haven. (66B) 
7. LUDWIK, P.: Elemente der Technologischen Mechanik. Berlin. (25, 33) 
8. MisEs, R. v.: Theorie der Wasserräder. Z. Math. Phys. 57, 1-120. (99, 137, 
138, 145, 162, 170, 202, 217) 
9. UsAI, G.: Sulle deformazioni di 2° ordine di una superficie flessibile ed estendibile. 
Rend. Ist. Lombardo (2} 42, 416-426. (64) 
10. VoLTERRA, V.: Sulle equazioni integro-differenziali della teoria dell' elasticita. 
Rend. Lincei (5) 181 , 295-301 = Opere 3, 288-293. (305) 
11. VoLTERRA, V.: Equazioni integro-differenziali della elasticita nel caso della iso1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
tropia. Rend. Lincei (5) 181 , 577-586 = Opere 3, 294-303. (305) 
BATEMAN, H.: The transformation of the electrodynamical equations. Proc. Land. 
Math. Soc. (2} 8, 223-264. (266, 270, 282) 
BoGGIO, T.: Sul moto permanente di un solido in un fluido indefinito. Atti Accad. 
Veneto 692, 883-891. (202) 
CALLENDER, H. L.: art. Heat. Encycl. Britt., 1 tth ed. to present ed. (240, 245) 
CISOTTI, U.: Sul moto permanente di un solido in un fluido indefinito. Atti Accad. 
Veneto 692, 427-445. (202) 
DARBOUX, G.: Le<;:ons sur les Systemes Orthogonaux et les Coordonnees Curvilignes, 
2nd ed. Paris. 567 pp. (38) 
KöTTER, F.: Über die Spannungen in einem ursprünglich geraden, durch Einzelkräfte in stark gekrümmter Gleichgewichtslage gehaltenen Stab. Sitzgsber. Preuss. 
Akad. Wiss., part 2, 895-922. (303} 
MINKOWSKI, H.: Die Grundgleichungen für die elektromagnetischen Vorgänge in 
bewegten Körpern. Math. Annalen 68, 472-525. (308} 
STRUTT, J. W. (Lord RAYLEIGH): Aerial plane waves of finite amplitude. Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Land. A 84, 247-284 = Papers 5, 573-610. (258) 
VEBLEN, 0., and J. W. YouNG: Projective Geometry. Boston. (21) 
V OIGT, W.: Lehrbuch der Kristallphysik Leipzig (repr. 1928}. (256 A, 296, 305, 
312) 
ALMANSI, E.: Sulle deformazioni finite dei solidi elastici isotropi, I. Rend. Lincei 
(SA) 201, 705-714. (31, 303) 
ALMANSI, E.: Sulle deformazioni finite dei solidi elastici isotropi, I li. Rend. Lincei 
(SA) 202, 287-296. (30) 
CRUDELI, V.: Sopra le deformazioni finite. Le equazioni del De Saint-Venant. 
Rend. Lincei (5 A) 202, 306-308, 470. (34) 
DuHEM, P.: Traite d'Energetique. Paris. 2 vols. (201, 241, 247, 262, 265) 
GwYTHER, R. F.: The conditions that the stresses in a heavy elastic body should 
be purely elastic stresses. Mem. Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 55, No. 20 (12 pp.). 
(227) 
List of Werks Cited. 
6. HAMEL, G.: Zum Turbulenzproblem. Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Göttingen, math.-phys. 
Kl., 261-270. (116) 
7. J AUMANN, G.: Geschlossenes System physikalischer und chemischer Differentialgesetze. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien (IIa) 120, 385-530. (6, 159, 215, 243, 
245, 262, 295) 
8. KARMAN, T.v.: Festigkeitsversuche unter allseitigem Druck. Z. VDI 55, 1749-1757-
(24) 
9. LE Roux, J.: Sur les covariants fondamenteaux du secend ordre dans la deformation finie d'un milieu continu. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 152, 1002-1005. (14, 20, 
26) 
10. LE Roux, J.: Sur l'incurvation et la flexion dans les deformations finies. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 152, 1655-1657- (20) 
11. LE Roux, J.: Etude geometrique de la torsion et de la flexion dans la deformation 
infinitesimale d'un milieu continu. Ann. Ecole Norm. (3) 28, 523-579. (20) 
12. VESSIOT, E.: Sur les transformations infinitesimales et la cinematique des milieux 
continus. Bull. Sei. Math. (2) 351, 233-244. (107, 109) 
13. ZoRAWSKI, K.: Über stationäre Bewegungen kontinuierlicher Medien. Bull. Int. 
Acad. Sei. Cracovie A, 1-17. (143, 146, 148, 153) 
14. ZoRAWSKI, K.: Invariantentheoretische Untersuchung gewisser Eigenschaften der 
Bewegungen kontinuierlicher Medien. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie A, 175-218. 
(84, 90, 104, 143, 144, 145, 153) 
1912 1. BoussrNESQ, J.: Theorie geometrique, pour un corps non rigide, des deplacements 
bien continus, ainsi que les deformations et rotations de ses particules. J. Math. 
pures appl. (6) 8, 211-227. Abstract, C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 154, 949-954. (30, 
57) 
2. DE DoNDER, T.: Sur la einematique des milieux continus. Bull. Acad. Belg., 
Cl. Sei., 243-251. (134, 146) 
3. GwvTHER, R. F.: The formal speeification of the elements of stress in cartesian, 
and in cylindrical and spherical polar Coordinates. Mem. Manchester Lit. Phil. 
Soc. 56, No. 10 (13 pp.). (227) 
4. HAMEL, G.: Elementare Mechanik. Leipzig u. Berlin. (30, 31) 
5. KARMAN, T. v.: Festigkeitsversuche unter allseitigen Druck. Forsch.-Arb. Ing.-Wes. 
1912, 37-68. (24) 
6. MrE, G.: Grundlagen einer Theorie der Materie. Ann. Physik 37, 511-534; 39, 
1-40; 40, 1-66. (276, 310) 
7. VOLTERRA, V.: Sur les equations integre-differentielles et leurs applications. Acta 
Math. 35, 295-356. (309) 
8. ZoRAWSKI, K.: Über gewisse Eigenschaften der Bewegungen kontinuierlicher 
Medien. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie A 269-292. (104, 153) 
1913 1. FERRARI, M.: Flusse di energia e veloeitä. di gruppo. Rend. Lincei (5) 22, 761 -766. 
(157) 
2. GwvTHER, R. F.: The specification of the elements of stress. Part II. A simplification of the speeification given in Part I. Mem. Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 57, 
No. 5 (4 pp.) (227) 
3. HAVELOCK, T. H.: The displacement of the particles in a case of fluid motion. 
Proc. Univ. Durharn Phil. Soc. 4 (1911-1912), 62-74. (71) 
4. HEUN, K.: Ansätze und allgemeine Methoden der Systemmechanik. Enz. math. 
Wiss. 42 (1904-1935), art. 11. (12, 66B, 159, 200, 212, 214, 236, 243) 
5. LE Roux, J.: Recherehes sur la geometrie des deformations finies. Ann. Ecole 
Norm. (3) 30, 193-235. (20) 
6. MrsEs, R. v.: Mechanik der festen Körper im plastisch-deformablen Zustand. 
Gött. Nachr. 582-592. (300) 
7. MoRTON, W. B.: On the displacements of the particles and their paths in some 
cases of two-dimensional motion of a frictionless liquid. Proc. Roy. Soc. Land. 
A 89, 106-124. (71) 
1914 1. BuRGATTI, P.: Sulle deformazioni finite dei corpi continui. Mem. Accad. Sei. 
Bologna (7) 1, 237-244. (34) 
2. DUHEM, P.: Sur le paradoxe hydrodynamique de d' Alembert. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 159, 592-595. (202) 
3. DUHEM, P.: Remarque sur le paradoxe hydrodynamique de d' Alembert. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 159, 638-640. (202) 
4. HELLINGER, E.: Die allgemeinen Ansätze der Mechanik der Kontinua. Enz. math. 
Wiss. 44, 602-694. (7, 9, 195, 231, 232, 232A, 233, 236, 237, 238, 256) 
5. HESSELBERG, TH., u. H. U. SVERDRUP: Das Beschleunigungsfeld bei einfachen 
Luftbewegungen. Veröff. geophys. Inst. Univ. Leipzig (2), No. 5. 117-146. (70) 
764 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
HuNTINGTON, E. V.: The theorem of rotation in elementary mechanics. Amer. 
math. monthly 21, 315-320. (170) 
MATTIOLI, G. D.: Sulle equazioni fondamentali della dinamica dei sistemi continui. 
Rend. Lincei (5) 232, 328-334. (157, 207, 217, 240) 
8. MoHR, 0.: Abhandlungen aus dem Gebiete der technischen Mechanik, 2nd ed. 
Berlin. (24) 
9. PrcARD, E.: A propos du paradoxe hydrodynamique de d' Alembert. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 159, 638. (202) 
10. RoEVER, W. H.: The design and theory of a mechanism for illustrating certain 
systems of lines of force and stream lines. Z. Math. Phys. 62 (1913-1914), 
376-384. Abstract in Bull. Amer. Soc. 18,435-536 (1912) and 19, 220 (1913). (70) 
11. SoMIGLIANA, C.: Sulla teoria delle distorsioni elastiche. Rend. Lincei (5) 231 , 
463-472. (175) 
1915 1. BöKER, R.: Die Mechanik der bleibenden Formänderung in kristallinisch aufgebauten Körpern. Forsch.-Arb. Ing.-Wes. 1915, 1-51. (24) 
2. EMDE, F.: Zur Vektorrechnung. Archiv Math. (3) 24, 1-11. (173) 
3. LoRENTZ, H. A.: The Theory of Electrons. Leipzig. (279) 
4. MoRTON, W. B., and J. VrNT: On the paths of the particles in some cases of motion 
of frictionless fluid in a rotating enclosure. Phil. Mag. (6) 30, 284-287. (71) 
1916 1. BrRKELAND, R.: Developpements sur le mouvement d'un fluide parallele a un 
plan fixe. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 163, 200-202. (161) 
2. FRIEDMANN, A.: Sur les tourbillans dans un liquide a temperature variable. c. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 163, 219-222. (110) 
3. LAMB, H.: 4th ed. of [1879. 2]. (See [1895. 2], [1906, 4], [1924, 9], [1932, 8].) (86A) 
4. PALATIN!, A.: Sulle quadriche di deformazione per gli spazi S3 . Atti Ist. Veneto 
76, 125-148. (84) 
5. SPIELREIN, J.: Lehrbuch der Vektorrechnung nach den Bedürfnissen in der Technischen Mechanik und Elektrizitätslehre. Stuttgart. (66B, 79, 80, 81, 173) 
6. TAYLOR, G. I.: Motion of solids in fluids when the flow is not irrotational. Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Lond., Ser. A 93 (1916-1917), 99-113. (143, 207) 
1917 1. ALMANSI, E.: L'ordinaria teoria dell' elasticita e Ia teoria delle deformazioni finite. 
Rend. Lincei (5) 262, 3-8. (55) 
2. APPELL, P.: Sur un theoreme de J oseph Bertrand relatif a Ia cinematique des 
milieux continus. Bull. Sei. Math. (2) 41, 23-28. (101) 
3. APPELL, P.: Sur une extension des equations de Ia theorie des tourbillans et des 
equations de Weber. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 164, 71-74. (101, 136) 
4. CrsoTTI, U.: Sulle azioni dinamiche di masse fluide continue. Rend. Lombardo 
(2) 50, 502-515. (170, 202) 
5. LOHR, E.: Entropieprinzip und geschlossenes Gleichungssystem. Denkschr. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien 93, 339-421. (6, 159, 243, 245, 262, 295) 
1918 1. CRUDELI, U.: Le formule del Cauchy e i fluidi viscosi. Rend. Lincei (5) 272, 49-52. 
(134) 
2. DIETZIUS, R.: Die Gestalt der Stromlinien in der Nähe der singulären Punkte. 
Beitr. Phys. fr. Atmosph. 8, 29- 52. (70) 
3. J AUMANN, G.: Physik der kontinuierlichen Medien. Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien 
95, 461-562. (6, 245, 262, 295) 
1920 1. ErNSTEIN, A.: Schallausbreitung in teilweise dissoziierten Gasen. Sitzgsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Berlin, math.-phys. Kl., 380-385. (159A) 
2. PASCAL, M.: Circuitazione superficiale. Rend. Lincei (5) 292, 3 53-356; 301, 117-119, 
249-251 (1921). (105) 
3. PAuLI, W.: Relativitätstheorie. Enz. math. Wiss. 5, No. 2. (284) 
1921 1. APPELL, P.: Traite de Mecanique Rationnelle, 3, Equilibre et Mouvement des Milieux 
Continus, 3rd. ed. Paris. (86, 101, 109, 122, 136, 138) 
2. BoRN, M.: Kritische Betrachtungen zur traditionellen Darstellung der Thermodynamik. Physik. Z. 22, 218-224, 249-254, 282-286. (245) 
3. ]AFFE, G.: Über den Transport von Vektorgrößen, mit Anwendung auf Wirbelbewegung in reibenden Flüssigkeiten. Physik. Z. 22, 180-183. (101, 131) 
4. MURNAGHAN, F. D.: The absolute significance of Maxwell's equations. Phys. Rev. 
(2) 17, 73-88. (266) 
5. PAscAL, M.: Circuitazione superficiale. Giorn. mat. 59, 215-234. (105) 
6. WEYL, H.: Raum-Zeit-Materie. 4th ed. Berlin: Springer. (266, 310) 
1922 1. BATEMAN, H.: Equations for the description of electromagnetic phenomena. Bull. 
Nat. Res. Council4, 96-191. (308) 
2. CARTAN, E.: Le.yons sur !es invariants integraux. Paris: Hermann. x + 210 pp. 
(129) 
3. 
4. 
.). 
6. 
1923 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
List of Works Cited. 765 
KoTTLER, F.: Newton'sches Gesetz und Metrik. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien (IIa) 
131, 1-14. (7) 
KoTTLER, F.: Maxwell' sehe Gleichungen und Metrik. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien 
(II a) 131, 119-146. (7, 266) 
LAMPE, E.: Review of [1914, 10]. Jb. Fortschr. Math. 1914-1915, 963. (70) 
MUNK, M.: Notes on aerodynamic forces, I. Rectilinear motion. Nat. Adv. Comm. 
Aero. T. N. 104. (76) 
CARTAN, E.: Sur les varit\tes a connexion affine et la theorie de la relativite glneralisee. Ann. Ecole Norm. (3) 40, 325-412; 41, 1-25 (1924); 42, 17-88 (1925). 
(7, 152. 211) 
CISOTTI, U.: Sull' energia einetica di masse fluide continua: viriale degli sforzi. 
Rend. Lincei (5) 322, 464-467. (219) 
CISOTTI, U.: Considerazione sulla nota formula idrodinamica di Daniele Bernoulli. 
Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. 2, 125-128. (125) 
CISOTTI, U.: Sul carattere necessariamente vorticoso dei moti regolari permanenti 
di un fluido qualsiasi in ambienti limitati, eppure in quiete all' infinito. Boll. Un. 
Mat. Ital. 2, 170-172. (125) 
LEONARDO DA VINCI: Del moto e misura dell' acqua. Ed. CARUSI e FAVARO: 
Bologna. Parts of this work were printed in various publications from 1765 onward. 
(77) 
1924 1. ARIANO, R.: Deformazioni finite dei sistemi continui. Rend. Palermo 48, 97-120. 
(12) 
2. CALDONAzzo, B.: Sulla geometria differenziale di superfieie aventi interesse idrodinamico. Rend. Lincei (5A) 332, 396-400. (122) 
3. COLLINET, E.: Sur l'energie interne d'un corps elastique. c. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
178, 373-375- (210) 
4. HEYMANS, P.: Note on a property of rectilinear lines of principal stress. J. Math. 
Phys. 3, 182-185. (223) 
5. lNGRAM, W. H.: Note on the curl. J. Math. Phys. 3, 186-187. (86) 
6. JouGUET, E.: Le potential interne des corps elastiques. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
178, 840-842. (210) 
7. JouGUET, E., et M. Rov: Le paradoxe de d'Alembert dans le cas des fluides compressibles. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 178, 1470-1472. Cf. remarks by CISOTTI, C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 178, 1792-1793 and by the authors, C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 179, 
142-143. (202) 
8. KELLOGG, 0. D.: The theorem of the moment of momentum. Amer. Math. Monthly 
31, 429-432. (170) 
9. LAMB, H.: 5th ed. of [1879, 2]. (See [1895. 2], [1906, 4], [1916, 3], [1932, 8].) (136) 
10. LoHR, E.: Das Entropieprinzip der Kontinuitätstheorie. Festschr. Techn. Hochschule Brünn 176-187. (243, 245, 262) 
11. NoAILLON, P.: Reponse aux observations de M. Pascal sur la circulation superficielle. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 178, 311-314. (101, 105) 
1925 1. ARIANO, R.: Deformazioni finite di sistemi continui, I. Ann. Mat. (4) 2, 217-261. 
(12) 
2. BRILLOUIN, L.: Les lois de l'elasticite sous forme tensorielle valable pour des coordonnees quelconques. Ann. de Phys. (10) 3, 251-298. (12, 31, 210) 
3. CALDONAZZO, B.: Un' osservazione a proposito del teorema di Bernoulli. Boll. 
Un. Mat. Ital. 4, 1-3. (122) 
4. CARATHEODORY, C.: Über die Bestimmung der Energie und der absoluten Temperatur mit Hilfe von reversiblen Prozessen. Ber. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, 39-47. (245) 
5. EHRENFEST-AFANASSJEWA, T.: Zur Axiomatisierung des zweiten Hauptsatzes der 
Thermodynamik. Z. Physik 33, 933-945; 34, 638. (245) 
6. FRIEDMANN, A.: Über Wirbelbewegung in einer kompressiblen Flüssigkeit. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 4, 102-107. (110) 
7. HENCKY, H.: Die Bewegungsgleichungen beim nichtstationären Fliessen elastischer 
Massen. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 5, 144-146. (66B, 150) 
8. LELLI, M.: Una forma piu generale del principio di Archimede. Boll. Un. Mat. 
Ital. 4, 63-64. (202) 
9. LELLI, M.: Sui teoremi delle quantita di moto per i sistemi continui. Boll. Un. 
Mat. Ital. 4, 204-206. (202) 
10. LICHTENSTEIN, L.: Über einige Existenzprobleme der Hydrodynamik homogener, 
unzusammendrückbarer, reibungsloser Flüssigkeiten und die Helmholtzschen Wirbeisätze. Math. Z. 23, 89-154. (101) 
766 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
1926 1. EISENHART, L. P.: Riemannian Geometry. Princeton. (34) 
2. FINZI, B.: Constatation energetique du paradoxe de d' Alembert dans !es liquides 
visqueux. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 182, 1077-1079. (202) 
3. KoTCHINE, N. E.: Sur la theorie des ondes de choc dans un fluide. Rend. Circ. 
Mat. Palermo 50, 305-344. (7, 172, 175, 180, 185, 186, 189, 191, 193, 194, 205, 
241, 297, 298) 
4. LANDE, A.: Axiomatische Begründung der Thermodynamik durch Caratheodory. 
Handbuch Physik 9, Chap. 4. (245) 
1927 1. BouLIGAND, G.: Sur le signe de la pression dans un liquide pesant en mouvement 
irrotationnel. Verh. 2. Int. Congr. Techn. Mech. (1926) 460-461. (121) 
2. BouLIGAND, G.: Un theoreme relatif a la pression au sein d'un liquide parfait 
en mouvement irrotationnel. J. Math. pures appl. (9) 427-433. (121) 
3. DE DoNDER, T.: L'affinite. Mem. acad. Sei. Belg. in 8° (2) 9, No. 7. 94 pp. Also 
issued separately, Paris 1927. 2nd ed., revised by P. VAN RYSSELBERGHE. Paris: 
Gauthier-Villars 1936. xv + 142pp. (159A, 259) 
4. EISENHART, L. P.: Non-Riemannian Geometry. New York: Amer. Math. Soc. 
(152) 
5. LICHTENSTEIN, L.: Über einige Existenzprobleme der Hydrodynamik II: Nichthomogene, unzusammenrückbare, reibungslose Flüssigkeiten. Math. Z. 26, 196-323. 
(101) 
6. LovE, A. E. H.: 4th ed. of [1892, 8] and [1893, 5]. (38, 256A, 301) 
7. MASOTTI, A.: Osservazioni sui moti di un fluido nei quali e stazionaria Ja distribuzione del vortice. Rend. Lincei (6) 6, 224-228. (111, 125) 
8. VEBLEN, 0.: Invariants of quadratic differential forms. Cambr. tracts math. and 
math. phys. No. 24, Cambridge. (34, 147) 
1928 1. ARIANO, R.: Deformazioni finite di sistemi continui I-III. Ann. di mat. (4) 5, 
55-71; 6, 265-282 (1929). (12) 
2. BRILLOUIN, L.: Les Jois de l'elastieite en coordonnees quelconques. Proc. Int. 
Congr. Math. Toronto (1924) 2, 73-97 ( a preliminary version of [1925, 2]). (31, 
210) 
3. HALDANE, J. S.: Gases and Liquids. Edinburgh. (245) 
4. HENCKY, H.: Über die Form des Elastizitätsgesetzes bei ideal elastischen Stoffen. 
Z. techn. Phys. 9, 214-223, 457. (33) 
5. LEVI-CIVITA, T.: Fondamenti di meccanica relativistica. Bologna: Zanichelli. 
vii + 185 pp. (211) 
1929 1. DE DoNDER, T.: L'affinite II. Bull. Sei. Acad. Belg. (5) 15, 615-625, 900-912; 
17, 298-314, 507-515, 653-663, 780-787, 874-887, 1001-1007 (1931). Repr., with 2 suppl. papers, Paris 1931. (259) 
2. HENCKY, H.: Welche Umstände bedingen die Verfestigung bei der bildsamen Verformung von festen isotropen Körpern? Z. Physik 55, 145-155. (33) 
3. HENCKY, H.: Das Superpositionsgesetz eines endlich deformierten relaxationsfähigen elastischen Kontinuums und seine Bedeutung für eine exakte Ableitung 
der Gleichungen für die zähe Flüssigkeit in der Eulerschen Form. Ann. Physik 
(5) 2, 617-630. (33, 95, 148) 
4. LICHTENSTEIN, L.: Grundlagen der Hydromechanik. Berlin: Springer. (88, 101, 
105, 121, 172, 174, 182, 187, 189) 
5. LICHTENSTEIN, L.: Bemerkung über einen Verzerrungssatz bei topologischer Abbildung in der Hydromechanik. Math. Z. 30, 321-324. (65) 
6. PoLUBARINOVA, P. YA.: Singularpoints of stream lines of affine motion in space 
[in Russian]. Isv. Glavn. Geofiz. Observ. No. 1, 1-16. (70) 
7. PoMPEIU, D.: Sur la condition des vitesses dans un fluide incompressible. Bull. 
math. phys. Ecole Polyt. Bucarest 1, 42-43. (160) 
8. SARTON, G.: The discovery of the law of conservation of energy. Isis 13 ( 1929-1930), 
18-34. (240) 
9. SouTHWELL, R. V.: Mechanics. Encycl. Britt. 14th ed. In the 1944 printing, 
15, 156-168. (3) 
10. THIRRING, H.: Begriffssystem und Grundgesetze der Feldphysik. Handbuch 
Physik 4, 81-177. (293) 
1930 1. FINZI, B.: Sopra i1 tensore di deformazione di un velo. Rend. Ist. Lombardo (2) 
63, 975-982. (34, 84) 
2. KIRCHHOFF, W.: Reduktion simultaner partieller Differentialgleichungen bei hydrodynamischen Problemen. J. reine angew. Math. 164, 183-195. (161, 225) 
3. MISES, R. v.: Über die bisherigen Ansätze in der klassischen Mechanik der Kontinua. Proc. Jrd Int. Congr. appl. Mech. Stockholm 2, 1-9. (7) 
List of Works Cited. 767 
4. SrGNORINI, A.: Sulle deformazioni finite dei sistemi continui. Rend. Lincei (6) 
12, 312-316. (34) 
5. SrGNORINI, A.: Sulla meccanica dei sistemi continui. Rend. Lincei (6) 12, 411-416. 
(210) 
6. SrGNORINI, A.: Sulle deformazioni termoelastiche finite. Proc. 3rd Int. Congr. 
appl. Mech. Stockholm 2, 80-89. (33A, 43, 44, 210) 
7. ToNoLo, A.: Forma intrinseca delle equazioni dell' equilibrio dei mezzi elastici. 
Rend. Lincei (6) 12, 247-250, 347-351. (205A) 
8. VrLLAT, H.: Leyons sur Ia Theorie des Tourbillons. Paris. (101) 
9. VoLTERRA, V.: Theory of Functionals and of Integral and Integro-differential 
Equations. London and Glasgow: Blackie. (305, 309) 
1931 1. ANDRUETTO, G.: Sulle equazioni intrinseche dell' equilibrio elastico. Rend. Lincei 
(6) 13, 489-494. (205A) 
2. BATEMAN, H.: On dissipative systems and related variational principles. Phys. 
Rev. (2) 38, 815-819. (129) 
3. CoKER, E. G., and L. N. G. FrLoN: Photoelasticity. London: Cambridge Univ. 
Press. (31, 312) 
4. DE DoNDER, T.: Theorie invariantive de l'elasticite a deformations finies. Bull. 
Sei. Acad. Belg. (5) 17, 1152-1157. (152, 245) 
5. DUPONT, Y.: Quelques contributions a Ia theorie invariantive de l'elasticite. Bull. 
Sei. Acad. Belg. (5) 17, 441-459. (19, 31, 104) 
6. DUPONT, Y.: Sur la theorie invariantive de l'elasticite a deformations finies. c. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 192, 873-875. (31) 
7. MrMURA, Y.: On the foundation of the second law of thermodynamics. J. Hiroshima Univ. 1 (1930-1931), 43-53. (245) 
8. MIMURA, Y.: On the equations of motion in thermodynamics. J. Hiroshima Univ. 
1 (1930-1931), 117-123. (245) 
9. SBRANA, F.: Sulla validita del teorema di Bernoulli per un fluido reale. Boll. Un. 
Mat. Ital. 10, 77-78. (124) 
10. SLEBODZINSKI, w.: Sur les equations canoniques de Hamilton. Bull. Sei. Acad. 
Belg. (5) 17, 864-870. (150) 
11. WEISSENBERG, K.: Die Mechanik deformierbarer Körper. Abh. Akad. Wiss. Berlin 
No. 2. (241) 
1932 1. ANDRUETTO, G.: Le formnie di Saint-Venant per gli spazi curvi a tre dimensioni. 
Rend. Lincei (6) 15, 214-218. (84) 
2. ANDRUETTO, G.: Le formnie di Saint-Venant perle varieta V,, a curvatura costante. 
Rend. Lincei (6) 15, 792-797- (84) 
3. BoNVICINI, D.: Sulle deformazioni non infinitesimi. Rend. Lincei (6) 16, 607-612. 
(29, 86, 95, 104) 
4. CrsoTTr, U.: Spostamenti rigidi finiti. Rend. Lincei (6) 16, 381-386. (55) 
5. DE DoNDER, T.: L'affinite (III). Bull. Sei. Acad. Belg. (5) 18, 578-595, 888-898, 
1124-1137; 19, 881-892, 1140-1152, 1364-1376 (1933); 20, 268-281 (1934). 
Reprinted, with 8 supplementary papers, Paris 1934. (259) 
6. DuPONT, Y.: Applications physico-chimiques de la thermodynamique des systemes 
en mouvement. Bull. Sei. Acad. Belg. (5) 18, 83-94 = reprint of [1932, 5, suppl., 
23-34]. (259) 
7. IWATSUKI, T., and MIMURA: On the adiabatic process of the thermodynamical 
system in which the entropy cannot be defined. J. Hiroshima Univ. 2 (1931-1932), 
127-138. (245) 
8. LAMB, H.: 6th ed. of [1879, 2]. (See [1895, 2], [1906, 4], [1916, 3], [1924, 9].) 
(256) 
9. MASOTTI, A.: Sul teorema di König. Atti Pontif. Accad. Sei. Nuovi Lincei 85 
(1931-1932), 37-42. (167) 
10. ONSAGER, L., and R. M. Fuoss: Irreversible properties in electrolytes. Diffusion, 
conductance, and viscous flow in arbitrary mixtures of strong electrolytes. J. Physic. 
Chem. 36, 2689-2978. (295) 
11. SrGNORINI, A.: Aleune proprieta di media nella elastostatica ordinaria. Rend. 
Lincei (6) 15, 151-156. (220) 
12. SrGNORINI, A.: Sollecitazioni iperastatiche. Rend. Ist. Lombardo (2) 65, 1-7. (221) 
13. VAN DANTZIG, D.: Zur allgemeinen projektiven Differentialgeometrie, II. Xn+l 
mit eingliedriger Gruppe. Proc. Akad. Wet. Amsterd. 35, 535-542. (150) 
14. WuNDHEILER, A.: Kovariante Ableitung und die Cesarosche Unbeweglichkeitsbedingungen. Math. Z. 36, 104-109. (16, 150) 
15. WUNDHEILER, A. W.: Rheonome Geometrie. Absolute Mechanik. Proc. matem.-
fiz. (Warsaw) 49, 97-142. (153) 
768 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
1933 1. AGOSTINELLI, C.: Le condizioni di Saint-Venant perle deformazioni di una varietä. 
riemanniana generica. Rend. Lincei (6) 18, 529-533; (6) 19, 22-26 (1934). (84) 
2. ARRIGHI, G.: Una generalizzazione dell' equazione di continuita. Rend. Lincei 
(6) 18, 302-307. (157) 
3. BJERKNES, V., J. BJERKNES, H. SoLBERG u. T. BERGERON: Physikalische Hydrodynamik. Berlin: Springer. xviii + 797 pp. (3, 185, 256A, 297) 
4. FROMM, H.: Stoffgesetze des isotropen Kontinuums, insbesondere bei zähplastischem Verhalten. lng.-Arch. 4, 432-466. (148) 
5. GALLI, A.: Sulle deformazioni pure infinitesime. Rend. Napoli (4) 3, 55-58. 
6. HLAVATY, V.: Über eine Art der Punktkonnexion. Math. Z. 38, 135-145. (16) 
7. KLoTTER, K.: Über die graphische Darstellung zugeordneter Spannungs- und Verzerrungszustand. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 13, 433-434. (24) 
8. MüLLER, W.: Über den Impulssatz der Hydrodynamik für bewegte Gefäßwände 
und die Berechnung der Reaktionskräfte der Flüssigkeit. Ann. Physik (5) 16, 
489-512. (202) 
9. ÜDONE, F.: Deformazioni finite e deformazioni infinitesime. Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. 
11, 238-241. (57) 
10. SIGNORINI, A.: Sopra alcune questioni di statica dei sistemi continui. Ann. Scuola 
Norm. Pisa (2) 2, 231-257- (216, 221, 222, 223) 
11. TESAR, V.: A graphical representation of two-dimensional stress distributions. 
]. Franklin Inst. 216, 217-224. (209) 
12. VALCOVICI, V.: Sur le mouvement d'un solide rigide. Bull. math. phys. Ecole 
Polyt. Bucarest 3 (1932-1933). 171-179. (160) 
13. VAN LEHRBERGHE, G.: La conservation de l'energie dans les milieux continus. 
Publ. Assoc. lngen. Mons 47, 601-618. (241) 
1934 1. BRAHTZ, J.: Notes on the Airy stress function. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 40, 427-430. 
(224) 
2. FINZI, B.: Integrazione delle equazioni indefinite della meccanica dei sistemi continui. Rend. Lincei (6) 19, 578-584, 620-623. (84, 211, 224, 227, 229, 230) 
3. PALATIN!, A.: Sulle condizioni di Saint-Venant in una V,. qualsivoglia. Rend. 
Lincei (6) 19, 466-469. (84) 
4. PHILLIPS, H. B.: Stress functions. J. Math. Phys. 13, 421-425. (224, 228) 
5. PucHER, A.: Über den Spannungszustand in gekrümmten Flächen. Beton und 
Eisen 33, 298-304. (229) 
6. SBRANA, F.: Moti fluidi dipendenti da due sole coordinate. Atti Pontif. Accad. 
Sei. Nuovi Lincei 87 (1933-1934), 256-262. (162) 
7. SCHOUTEN, J., u. E. VAN KAMPEN: Beiträge zur Theorie der Deformation. Proc. 
mat.-fiz. 41, 1-19. (150) 
8. ScHOUTEN, J., u. J. HAANTJES: Über die konforminvariante Gestalt der Maxwellsehen Gleichungen und der elektromagnetischen Impulsenergiegleichungen. 
Physica, Haag 1, 869-872. (266) 
9. TRICOMI, F.: Un'interpretazione intuitiva del rotore e della condizione d'irrotazionalita. Rend. Lincei (6) 19, 399-401. (87) 
10. VAN DANTZIG, D.: Electromagnetism, independent of metrical geometry, I. The 
foundations; II. Variational principles and a further generalization of the theory; 
III. Mass and Motion; IV. Momentum and energy; waves. Proc. Akad. Wet. 
Amsterd. 37, 521-525, 526-531, 643-652, 825-836. (166, 238, 270, 310) 
11. VAN DANTZIG, D.: The fundamental equations of electromagnetism, independent 
of metrical geometry. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 30, 421-427. (266) 
1935 1. BOGGIO, T.: Sull' integrazione delle equazioni idrodinamiche di Helmholtz. Rend. 
Lincei (6) 21, 415-419. (101) 
2. BONVICINI, D.: Sulla deformazione pura nel caso di spostamenti finiti e sulla 
relazione di essa colla tensione nei corpi anisotropi. Ann. di Mat. (4) 13, 113-117. 
(29, 95) 
3. LEVI-CIVITA, T.: Movimenti di un sistema continuo ehe rispettano l'invariabilita 
sostanziale del baricentro. Atti Pontif. Accad. Sei. Nuovi Lincei 88 (1934-1935), 
102-106. Abstract in Pontif. Accad. Sei. Nuncius No. 37, 4 (1935). (165) 
4. ScHoUTEN,J.A., u. D.J.STRUIK: Einführung indieneueren Methoden der Differentialgeometrie I, 2nd ed. Groningen: Noordhoff. xii + 202 pp. (150) 
5. ScHWERDTFEGER, A.: Über schwerpunktbehaltende Bewegungen materieller Systeme. 
Atti Pontif. Accad. Sei. Nuovi Lincei 88 (1934-1935), 302-307. (165) 
6. SHAW, A. N.: The derivation of thermodynamical relations for a simple system. 
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 234, 299-328. (251) 
7. SOBRERO, L.: Dei significato meccanico della funzione di Airy. Ric. di Ingegneria 
3, 77-80 = Rend. Lincei (6) 21, 264-269. (224) 
8. 
9. 
10. 
1936 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
1937 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
1938 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
List of Works Cited. 769 
SuDRIA, J.: L'action euclidienne de detormation et de mouvement. Mem. Sei. 
Phys. Paris. No. 29, 56 pp. (60) 
VAN MIEGHEN, J.: Thermodynamique des systemes non-uniformes en vue des 
applications a Ia meteorologie. Geofys. Pub!. Norske Vid.-Akad. 10, No. 14, 18 pp. 
(243, 262) 
WEISSENBERG, K.: La mecanique des corps detormables. Arch. Sei. phys. nat. 
Geneve (5) 17, 44-106, 130-171. (33, 42, 241) 
BATEMAN, H.: Progressive waves of finite amplitude and some steady motions 
of an elastic fluid. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S.A. 22, 607-619. (224) 
BERKER, A. R.: Sur quelques cas d'integration des equations du mouvement d'un 
fluide visqueux incompressible. Paris and Lilie. 161 pp. (68) 
CRocco, L.: Una nuova funzione di corrente per lo studio del moto rotazionale 
dei gas. Rend. Lincei ( 6A) 23, 11 5- 124; transl. Eine neue Stromfunktion für die 
Erforschung der Bewegung der Gase mit Rotation. Z. a~gew. Math. Mech. 17 
(1937), 1-7. (123, 133, 161, 162) 
HAMEL, G.: Ein allgemeiner Satz über den Druck bei der Bewegung volumbeständiger Flüssigkeiten. Mh. Math. Phys. 43, 345-363. (115, 121) 
KILCHEVSKI, N.: Foundation and generalization of Hooke's law on the basis of a 
law of economy of mass-energy and the problern of two non-linear measures in the 
theory of elasticity [in Ukrainian]. Zh. Irrst. Mat. Akad. Nauk USRR. 1936-1937, 
No. 2, 77-89. (211) 
KosTYUK, A.: Equation of continuity [in Russian]. Uchenie Zapiski Kazanskogo 
Univ. 964- 5, 44-59. (141) 
MUNK, M.: On the common space integrals of aerodynamics. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 
3, 243-247. (76) 
PLATRIER, C.: Cinematique des milieux continus. Actual. sei. industr. No. 327, 
34 pp. (12) 
SYNGE, J. L.: Conditions satisfied by the velocity and the streamfunction in a 
viscous liquid moving in two dimensions between fixed parallel planes. Proc. 
Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 40, 23-36. (116) 
EPSTEIN, S.: Textbook of Thermodynamics. New York. (240, 265) 
HAMEL, G.: Potentialströmungen mit konstanter Geschwindigkeit. Sitzgsber. 
preuss. Akad. Wiss., phys.-math. Kl. 5-20. (111) 
KARMAN, T.v.: On the statistical theory of turbulence. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. 
U.S.A. 23, 98-105. (101) 
LAGALLY, M.: Die zweite Invariante des Verzerrungstensors. Z. angew. Math. 
Mech. 17, 80-84. (121) 
The Origin of CLERK MAXWELL's Electric Ideas, as Described in Familiar Letters 
to William Thomson. Ed. J. LARMOR. Cambridge. (300) 
MERLIN, E.: Un theoreme sur Je mouvement des fluides depourvus d'acceleration. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 205, 1128-1130. (141) 
MURNAGHAN, F. D.: Finite deformations of an elastic solid. Amer. J. Math. 59, 
235-260. (14, 30, 31, 95, 232) 
ODQVIST, F.: Equations de compatibilite pour un systeme de coordonnees triples 
orthogonaux quelconques. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 205, 202-204. (57) 
THEODOREsco, N.: Sur l'equilibre des milieux continus. Bull. math. phys. Ecole 
Polyt. Bucarest 8 (1936-1937), 179-185. (223) 
VAN DANTZIG, D.: Über das Verhältnis von Geometrie und Physik. C. r. Congr. 
Int. Math. Oslo ( 1936) 2, 225-227. (266) 
VAN DANTZIG, D.: Some possibilities of the future development of the notions 
of space and time. Erkenntnis 7, 142-146. (7, 266) 
ZAREMBA, S.: Sur une conceptjon nouvelle des forces interieures dans un fluide 
en mouvement. Mem. sei. math. No. 82. (148, 293, 305) 
BATEMAN, H.: The Iift and drag functions for an elastic fluid in two-dimensional 
irrotational flow. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S.A. 24, 246-251. (224) 
BRILLOUIN, L.: Les Tenseurs en Mecanique et en Elasticite. Paris. (12, 31, 210, 
246, 256A) 
DE DONDER, T.: Sur Ia vitesse reactionelle. Bull. Acad. Belg., Cl. Sei. (5) 24, 15-18 
(159A, 245) 
EcKART, C.: The electrodynamics of material media. Phys. Rev. (2) 54, 920-923. 
(236A) 
KILCHEVSKI, N.: A new theory of the mechanics of continuous media [in Ukrainian]. Zbirnik Inst. Mat. Akad. Nauk URSR No. 1, 17-114. (33A, 34, 152, 211, 
212, 21.3) 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. Ill/1. 49 
770 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
6. LAMPARIELLO, G.: Varieta sostanziali nel moto di un sistema continuo. Atti 1° 
Congr. Un. Mat. Ital. (1937). 391-393. (75) 
7. MEISSNER, W.: Thermodynamische Behandlung stationärer Vorgänge in Mehrphasensystemen. Ann. Physik (5) 32, 115-127. (159, 243, 258) 
8. MERLIN, E.: Etude du mouvement d'un fluide parfait depourvu d'acceleration. 
Ann. Ecole Norm. (3) 55, 223-255. (141) 
9. MILNE-THoMsoN, L. M.: Theoretical Hydrodynamics. London: Macmillan. (71, 
202) 
10. PAILLOUX, H.: Mouvements fluides fournissant une suite de surfaces applicables 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 207, 319-321. (83) 
11. RIABOUCHINSKI, D.: Comparaison de la methodedes variables (tp, tp1 , tp2 , t) a celles 
des variables d'Euler et de Lagrange. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 206, 295-297. (70) 
1939 1. BATEMAN, H.: The aerodynamics of reacting substances. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. 
U.S.A. 25, 388-391. (159) 
2. BIEZENO, C. B., u. R. GRAMMEL: Technische Dynamik. Berlin: Springer. (33) 
3. BroT, M. A.: Non-linear theory of elasticity and the linearized case for a body 
under initial stress. Phil. Mag. (7) 27, 468-489. (33A) 
4. BroT, M. A.: Theory of elasticity with large displacements and rotations. Proc. 
5th Int. Congr. appl. Mech., New York and London, 117-122. (33A) 
5. BroT, M. A.: Theorie de l'elasticite du secend ordre avec application a la theorie 
du flambage. Ann. Soc. Sei. Bruxelles (1) 59, 104--112. (33A) 
6. CHAPMAN, S., and T. G. CowLING: The Mathematical Theory of Non-uniform 
Gases. Cambridge. (215, 243, 295) 
7. EICHENWALD, A.: La funzione hamiltoniana nei mezzi continui. Rend. Sem. Mat. 
Fis. Milano 13, 15-34. (231) 
8. FRITSCHE, B.: Die Spannungsellipse. Ing.-Arch. 10, 427-428. (21) 
9. GuEST, J. J.: A graphical construction for stress. Phil. Mag. (7) 27, 445-448. 
(23) 
10. }ARDETZKY, W.: Zur Frage der Axiomatik des zweiten Hauptsatzes der Thermodynamik. Bull. Acad. Serbe Sei. (A) 5, 33-47. (245) 
11. KAPPUS, R.: Zur Elasticitätstheorie endlicher Verschiebungen. Z. angew. Math. 
Mech. 19, 271-285. 344-361. (55) 
12. PucHER, A.: Über die Spannungsfunktion beliebig gekrümmter dünner Schalen. 
Proc. 5th lnt. Congr. appl. Mech. Cambridge (1938), 134-139. (229) 
13. SIGNORINI, A.: V alori medi delle caratteristiche dello stress in stereodinamica. 
Rend. Lincei (6) 29, 536-541. (220) 
1940 1. BALLABH, R.: Superposahle fluid motions. Proc. Benares Math. Soc. (2) 2, 69-79. 
(112, 114) ' 
2. BALLABH, R.: Self-superposable fluid motions of the type ~ = ilu, etc. Proc. Benares 
Math. Soc. (2) 2, 85-89. (114) 
3. BroT, M. A.: Elastizitätstheorie zweiter Ordnung mit Anwendungen. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 20, 89-99. (33A) 
4. BR0NSTED, J. N.: The fundamental principles of energetics. Phil. Mag. (7) 29, 
449-470. (245) 
5. BR0NSTED, J. N.: The derivation of the equilibrium conditions in physical chemistry 
on the basis of the work principle. J. Phys. Chem. 44, 699-712. (245) 
6. CrsoTTI, U.: Elementi di media nella meccanica dei sistemi continui. Rend. Sem. 
Mat. Fis. Milane 14, 128-138. (216, 219) 
7. EcKART, C.: The thermodynamics of irreversible processes, I. The simple fluid. 
Phys. Rev. (2) 58, 267-269. (257) 
8. EcKART, C.: The thermodynamics of irreversible processes, li. Fluid mixtures. 
Phys. Rev. (2) 58, 269-275. 924. (159, 159A, 215, 243, 245, 255, 259, 261, 295) 
9. EISENHART, L. P.: An lntroduction to Differential Geometry with the Use of the 
Tensor Calculus. Princeton: Univ. Press. x + 304 pp. (64) 
10. FADLE, J.: Über eine zweckmäßige Darstellung des Mohrsehen Spannungskreises 
zur unmittelbaren Auftindung sämtlicher Spannungs- Richtungspfeile. Ing.-Arch. 
11, 319-322. (24) 
11. FrNZI, B.: Principio variazionale nella meccanica dei continui. Rend. Accad. 
Ital. (7) 1, 412-417. (232A) 
12. GRIOLI, G.: Una proprieta di minimo nella cinematica delle deformazioni finite. 
Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. (2) 2, 452-455. (42) 
13. HELLUND, E. J.: Generalized theory of diffusion. Phys. Rev. (2) 57, 319-333. 
(295) 
14. LEVI-CIVITA, T.: Nozione adimensionale di vortice e sua applicazione alle onde 
trocoidale di Gerstner. Acta Pontif. Acad. Sei. 4, 23-30. (91) 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
1941 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
1942 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
1943 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
List of Works Cited. 771 
LocATELLI, P.: Sulla congruenza delle deformazioni. Rend. Ist. Lombardo 73 = 
(3) 4 (1939-1940), 457-464. (234, 235) 
LocATELLI, P.: Sul principio di Menabrea. Bol!. Un. Nat. Ital. (2) 2, 342-347. 
(234) 
LoHR, E.: Ein thermodynamischer Weg zum Planckschen Strahlungsgesetz. Z. 
Physik 116, 454-468. (262) 
WrsE, J. A.: Circles of strain. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 7, 438-440. (24) 
DEUKER, E.-A.: Beitrag zur Theorie endlicher Verformungen und zur Stabilitätstheorie des elastischen Körpers. Deutsche Math. 5 (1940-1941), 546-562. (65, 
66, 95, 210) 
MEIXNER, J.: Zur Thermodynamik der Thermodiffusion. Ann. Physik (5) 39, 
333-356. (159, 241, 243, 245, 255, 257, 295) 
MuRNAGHAN, F. D.: The compressibility of solids under extreme pressures. Karman 
Anniv. Vol., 121-136. (33, 33A) 
MuNK, M.: On some vortex theorems of hydrodynamics. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 5, 
90-96. (118) 
RErSSNER, E.: A new derivation of the equations for the deformation of elastic 
shells. Amer. J. Math. 63, 177-184. (212) 
SERINI, R.: Deduzione de!le equazioni della dinamica dei sistemi continui senza 
far uso del principio di d'Alembert. Bol!. Un. Mat. Ital. (2) 3, 281-283. (170} 
SrGNORINI, A.: Sulle proprieta di media communi a tutti i sistemi continui. Rend. 
Accad. Ital. (7) 2, 728-734. (222) 
STRATTON, J. A.: Electromagnetic Theory. New York. (281, 283, 312) 
SYNGE, J. L., and W. z. CHIEN: The intrinsic theory of elastic shells and plates. 
Karman Anniv. Vol., 103-120. (64, 212, 213) 
BERGMANN, P. G.: Introduction to the Theory of Re!ativity. New York. (271, 282) 
CARSTOIU, I.: Nouveaux points de vue sur quelques theoremes fondamentaux 
de Ia mecanique des fluides. Bull. Politech. Bucarest 13, 42-45. (110) 
CrsoTTI, U.: Formule integrali relative alla meccanica dei sistemi continui. Atti 
2° Congr. Un. Mat. Ital. (1940), 404-414. (216, 219) 
ERTEL, H.: Ein neuer hydrodynamischer Erhaltungssatz. Naturwiss. 30, 543-544. 
(130) 
ER TEL, H.: Ein neuer hydrodynamischer Wirbe!satz. Meteor. Z. 59, 277-281. (130) 
ERTEL, H.: Über das Verhältnis des neuen hydrodynamischen Wirbelsatzes zum 
Zirkulationssatz von V. Bjerknes. Meteor. Z. 59, 385-387. (130) 
ERTEL, H.: Über hydrodynamische Wirbelsätze. Physik. Z. 43, 526-529. (130) 
HAY, G. E.: The finite displacement of thin rods. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 51, 
65-102. (63A, 214) 
MErXNER, J.: Reversible Bewegungen von Flüssigkeiten und Gasen. Ann. Physik 
(5) 41, 409-425. (241, 259) 
MorsrL, G. C.: Sur le passage des variables de Lagrange aux variables d'Euler en 
hydrodynamique. Bull. Math. Soc. Roumaine Sei. 44, 55-58. (66) 
SIGNORINI, A.: Deformazioni elastiche finite: elastieita di 2° grado. Atti 2° Congr. 
Mat. Ital. Rome (1940), 56-71. (34) 
STEWART, R. J.: The energy equation for a viscous compressible fluid. Proc. 
Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S.A. 28, 161-164. (241) 
TEDONE, G.: Qualehe applicazione di una proprieta di media dello stress. Bol!. 
Un. Mat. ltal. (2) 4, 93-99. (220) 
VERSCHAFFELT, J. E.: La thermomecanique de Ja diffusion des gaz. Bull. Sei. 
Acad. Roy. Belg. (5) 28, 455-475. (159, 243) 
VERSCHAFFELT, J. E.: Sur Ia thermomecanique des fluides en mouvement. Bull. 
Sei. Acad. Roy. Belg. (5) 28, 476-489. (159, 243) 
BoYER, C. B.: History of the measurement of heat. II. The conservation of energy. 
Sei. monthly 57, 546-554. (240) 
MEIXNER, J.: Zur Thermodynamik der irreveriblen Prozesse in Gasen mit chemisch 
reagierenden, dissoziierenden und anregbaren Komponenten. Ann. Physik (5) 43, 
244-270. (243, 245, 255, 259, 295) 
MEIXNER, J.: Zur Thermodynamik der irreversiblen Prozesse. Z. physik. Chem., 
Abt. B 53, 235-263. (257, 259, 295) 
NovozHILOV, V.: On a error in a hypothesis of the theory of shells. C. R. Acad. 
Sei. SSSR. (Doklady) (N.S.) 38, 160-164. (213) 
NovozHILOV, V., and P. FrNKELSHTEIN: On an error in the hypothesis of Kirchhof! 
in the theory of shells [in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 7, 333-340. (213) 
SrGNORINI, A.: Trasformazioni termoelastiche finite, Memoria 1 a. Ann. di Mat. 
{4) 22, 33-143. (12, 27, 30, 31, 34, 37, .38, 39, 41, 45, 47, 50, 59, 210) 
49* 
772 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
7. ToLOTTI, C.: Le equazioni lagrangiane della rneccanica dei sisterni continui in 
coordinate generali. Rend. Acad. Napoli (4) 13, 1-9. (210) 
8. ToNOLO, A.: Teoria tensoriale delle deforrnazioni finite dei corpi solidi. Rend. Sem. 
Mat. Fadova 14, 43-117. (12, 29, 31, 34) 
1944 1. CARSTOIU, 1.: Sur Ia condition des accelE\rations dans un fluide incornpressible. 
Math. Tirni~oara 20, 172-173. (160) 
2. CHIEN, W.-Z.: The intrinsic theory of thin shells and plates. Part I. General 
theory. Quart. appl. Math. 1, 297-327. (64) 
3. CrsoTTI, U.: Deforrnazione finite isotrope. Rend. Ist. Lornbardo 77 = (3) 8, 
73-79- (27, 31) 
4. CrsoTTI, U.: Influenza delle rotazione finite nelle deforrnazioni infinitesirne di un 
solido elastico. Rend. Ist. Lornbardo 77 = (3) 8, 249-252. (55, 57) 
5. DuPONT, P.: Representation triangulaire du tenseur des contraintes en elasticite. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 218, 778-780. (24) 
6. J ACOB, C.: Sur une interpretation de I'equation de continuite hydrodynarnique. 
Bull. Math. Soc. Rournaine Sei. 46, 81-90. (160) 
7. LAMM, 0.: Theorie der Diffusion ternärer Lösungen. Arkiv. Kerni Miner. Geol. 18A 
(1944/1945), No. 2, 10pp. (295) 
8. LEAF, B.: The principles of thermodynamics. J. Chern. Phys. 12, 89-98. (245) 
9. LUNEBERG, R. K.: Mathematical Theory of Optics. Mimeographed notes of a series 
of Iectures given at Brown University, Providence. (278) 
10. RrvAUD, ] . : Remarques sur Je problerne de l'elasticite non lineaire. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 218, 698-700. (210) 
11. SETH, B. R.: Consistency equations of finite strain. Proc. Indian Acad. Sei. A 20, 
336-339. (34) 
12. VLASOV, V. Z.: Equations of cornpatibility of deformation in curvilinear co-ordinates 
[in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 8, 301-306. (57) 
1945 1. CHARREAU, A.: Sur des representations planes du tenseur des contraintes dans 
un rnilieu continu. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 220, 642-643. (24) 
2. CoWLING, T. G.: The electrical conductivity of an ionized gas in a rnagnetic field, 
with applications to the solar atmosphere and the ionosphere. Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond., Ser. A 183, 453-479- (295) 
3. KuzMIN, R. 0.: On Maxwell's forrnulae in the theory of elasticity. C. R. Acad. 
Sei. USSR. (Doklady) 49, 326-328. (227) 
4. ÜNSAGER, L.: Theories and problerns of liquid diffusion. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sei. 
46, 241-265. (295) 
5. REINER, M.: A rnathematical theory of dilatancy. Amer. J. Math. 67, 350-362. 
(299) 
6. TRUESDELL, C.: The rnembrane theory of shells of revolution. Trans. Arner. Math. 
Soc. 58, 96-166. (213) 
1946 1. CADY, W. G.: Piezoelectricity. London: McGraw-Hill. (312) 
2. CARSTOIU, I.: Generalization des forrnules de Helmholtz et de Cauchy pour un 
fluide visqueux incornpressible. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 223, 1095-1096. (101) 
3. CARSTOIU, I.: Sur le vecteur tourbillon de I'acceleration et les fonctions qui s'y 
rattachent. Bull. Cl. Sei. Acad. Roumaine 29, 207-214. (101, 109) 
4. CARSTOIU, I.: Sur le rnouvernent tourbillonaire a !J = const. d'un fluide parfait 
incompressible. Bull. Cl. Sei. Acad. Rournaine 28, 589-592. (138) 
5. HAYES, W. D.: Transformation groups of the thermodynamic variables. Quart. 
appl. Math. 4, 227-232. (251) 
6. KAMPE DE FERIET, J.: Sur Ia decroissance de l'energie cim\tique d'un fluide visqueux 
incompressible occupant up. dornaine plan borne. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 223, 
1096-1098. (93, 116) . 
7. LEAF, B.: Phenomenological theory of transport processes in fluids. Phys. Rev. 
(2) 70, 748-758. (215, 243, 255, 295) . 
8. ToRRE, C.: Über den plastischen Kqrper von Prandtl. Zur Theorie der Mohrsehen 
Grenzkurve. Öst. Ing.-Arch. 1, 36- SO. (24) 
9. VALcovrcr, V.: Sur une interpretation cinematique du tourbillon et sur Ia rotation 
des directions principales de Ia deformation. Mathernatica (Timi~oara) 22, 57-65. 
(86) 
10. WEYL, H.: The Classical Groups, their Invariants and Representations. Princeton. 
(268) 
1947 1. CALDONAZZO, B.: Sui rnoti liberi di un mezzo continuo. Ann. di Mat. (4) 26,43-55. 
(141) 
2. CARSTOIU, I.: De Ia circulation dans un fluide visqueux incompressible. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 224, 534-535. (136) 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
1948 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
List of Works Cited. 773 
CARSTOIU, I.: Recherehes sur Ia theorie des tourbillons. MS thesis, Univ. Paris. 
(123, 129) 
DEWULF, N.: Cercle de Mohr et coniques d'elasticite. Houille Elanehe 2, 481-487. 
(24) 
FrNCK, J. L.: On metastable states of equilibrium in thermodynamics. J. Franklin 
Inst. 243, 1 -12. (253) 
HICKS, B., P. GUENTHER and R. WASSERMAN: New formu]ation of the equations 
for compressible flow. Quart. appl. Math. 5, 357-361. (132) 
JUNG, F.: Der Culmannsche und der Mohrsehe Kreis. Öst. Ing.-Arch. 1, 408-410. 
(24) 
KAMPE DE FERIET, J.: On a property of the Laplacian of a function in a two dimensional bounded domain, when the first derivatives of the function vanish at the 
boundary. Math. Mag. 21, 74-79. (116) 
MrCHAL, A. D.: Matrix and Tensor Ca!culus. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 
London: Chapman-Hall, Ltd. xiii + 132 pp. (14, 19) 
MouFANG, R.: Volumentreue Verzerrungen bei endlichen Formänderung. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 25-27, 209-214. (33) 
PAILLOUX, H.: Sur !es equations du mouvement des fluides parfaits. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 225, 1122-1124. (211) 
PRIGOGINE, I.: Etude Thermodynamique des Phenomenes Irreversibles. Paris 
and Liege: Dunod-Desoer. 143 pp. (157, 158, 215, 243, 245,255, 259, 261, 295, 306) 
RrVLIN, R. S.: Hydrodynamics of non-Newtonian fluids. Nature 160, 611-613. 
(299) 
So!IIMERFELD, A.: Vorlesungen über theoretische Physik. Il, Mechanik deformierbarer Medien, 2nd ed. Wiesbaden. (302) 
SwAINGER, K.: Stress-strain compatibility in greatly deformed engineering metals. 
Phi!. Mag. (7) 38, 422-439. (33A) 
SwAINGER, K. H.: Large strains and displacements in stress-strain problems. 
Nature, Land. 160, 399-400. (33A) 
TRUESDELL, C. A., and R. N. ScHWARTZ: The Newtonian mechanics of continua. 
U.S. Nav. Ord. Lab. Mem. 9223. (293) 
TRUESDELL, C., and R. PRIM: Zorawski's kinematical theorems. U.S. Nav. Ord. 
Lab. Mem. 9354. (75) 
BALLABH, R.: On coincidence of vortex and stream lines in ideal liquids. Ganita 
1, 1-14. (112) 
BrLIMOVITCH, A.: Aires et volumes velocidiques et hodographiques dans un mouvement du fluide. Acad. Serbe Sei. Pub!. Inst. Math. 2, 37-52. (115, 160) 
BYUSHGENS, S.: Geometry of steady flow of an ideal incompressible fluid [in 
Russian]. Isv. Akad. Nauk SSSR., Ser. Mat. 12, 481-512. (110) 
CARSTOIU, I.: Sur certaines formnies integrales dans le mouvement d'un fluide. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 227, 1337-1339. (160) 
CASTOLDI, L.: Deduzione variazionale delle equazioni della dinamica dei continui 
deformabili. Nuovo Cim. (9) 5, 140-149. (210) 
CASTOLDI, L.: Superficie e linee di Bernoulli nel moto stazionario di un fluido reale. 
Atti Accad. Ligure 4 (1947). 21-25. (124) 
CHIEN, W.-Z.: Derivation of the equations of equilibrium of an elastic shell from 
the general theory of elasticity. Sei. Rep. Tsing-Hua Univ. A 5, 240-251. (213) 
CouRANT, R., and K. FRIEDRICHS: Supersonic Flow and Shock Waves. New York: 
Interscience. xvi + 464 pp. (241, 253, 265) 
DoRN, J. E., and A. J. LATTER: Stress-strain relations for finite elastoplastic deformations. J. appl. Mech. 15, 234-236. (33A) 
EcKART, C.: The thermodynamics of irreversible processes IV: The theory of elasticity and anelasticity. Phys. Rev. (2) 73, 373-382. (34, 96) 
FrNCK, J. L.: Thermodynamics, Part I: The second law from the standpoint of 
the equation of state; Part II: Work, heat, and temperature concepts, and an 
examination of the temperature scale. J. Franktin Inst. 245, 301-317, 365-378. 
(253) 
LoHR, E.: Quantenstatistik und Kontinuumsphysik. Z. Naturfosch. 3a, 625-636. 
(262) 
MANARINI, M.: Sulle equazioni della dinamica dei fluidi perfetti. Ball. Un. Mat. 
Ital. (3) 3, 111 -114. (211) 
MANARINI, M.: Sui paradossi di d' Alembert e di Brillouin nella dinamica dei fluidi. 
Rend. Lincei (8) 4, 427-433. (202) 
MooNEY, M.: The thermodynamics of a strained elastomer. I. General analysis. 
J. appl. Phys. 19, 434-444. (33A) 
774 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
1949 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
MoREAU, J.-J.: Sur deux theoremes generaux de Ia dynamique d'un milieu incompressible illimite. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 226, 1420-1422. (117) 
NEMENYI, P., and R. PRIM: Same properties of rotational flow of a perfect gas. 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S.A. 34, 119-124; 35, 116 (1949). (132) 
NovozHILOV, V. V.: Foundations of the Nonlinear Theory of Elasticity [in Russian]. 
(We have seen this work only in the English translation by F. BAGEMIHL, H. KROMM 
and W. SEIDEL, Rochester 1953.) (12, 34, 36, 55, 56, 210) 
PACELLA, G. B.: Su una proprieta della meccanica dei corpi continui e unadeduzione 
geometrica della !egge di Hooke. Rend. Lincei (8) 5, 31-37. (209) 
PLATRIER, C.: Equations universelles de l'equilibre des milieux les plus generaux 
a tenseur symetrique. Bull. Acad. Belg., CL Sei. 34, 274-277. (210) 
PRIM, R.: Extension of Crocco's theorems to flows having a non-uniform stagnation 
enthalpy. Phys. Rev. (2) 73, 186. (133) 
PRIM, R. C.: On doubly-laminar flow fields having a constant velocity magnitude 
along each stream-line. U.S. Naval Ord. Lab. Mem. 9762. (111) 
REINER, M.: Elastieity beyond the elastic Iimit. Amer. J. Math. 70, 433-446. 
(32, 33, 33A, 95, 303) 
RICHTER, H.: Das isotrope Elastizitätsgesetz. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 28, 205-209. 
(33, 33A) 
RICHTER, H.: Bemerkung zum Maufangsehen Verzerrungsdeviator. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 28, 126-127. (33) 
RIVLIN, R. S.: The hydrodynamics of non-Newtonian fluids I. Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond. A 193, 260-281. (299) 
RIVLIN, R. S.: Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials IV. Further 
developments of the generat theory. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 241, 379-397. (30) 
STRANG, J. A.: Superposahle fluid motions. Comm. fac. sei. Ankara 1, 1-32. (114) 
SWAINGER, K. H.: Strain energy in greatly deformed elastic or inelastic anisotropic engineering metals. J. Franklin Inst. 245, 501-516. (33A) 
SwAINGER, K. H.: Large displacements with small strains in loaded structures. 
J. appl. Mech. 15,45-52. (33A) 
ToLMAN, R. C., and P. C. FINE: On the irreversible production of entropy. Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 20, 51-7]. (257) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On the differential equations of slip flow. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. 
U.S.A. 34, 342-347. (293) 
TRUESDELL, C.: A new definition of a fluid. U.S. Nav. Ord. Lab. Mem. 9487. (293) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On the total vortieity of motion of a continuous medium. Phys. 
Rev. (2) 73, 510-512. (131) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On the transfer of energy in continuous media. Phys. Rev. (2) 
73, 513-515. (241) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Generalisation de Ia formule de Cauchy et des theoremes de Helmholtz au mouvement d'un milieu continu quelconque. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
227, 757-759. (101, 129) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Une formule pour le vecteur tourbillon d'un fluide visqueux 
elastique. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 227, 821-823. (101) 
WEBER, C.: Spannungsfunktionen des dreidimensionalen Kontinuums. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 28, 193-197. (227) 
ZELMANOV, A. N.: Application of convected co-ordinates in non-relativistic mechanics [in Russian]. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR. 61, 993-996. (34, 66B, 95, 150, 
210) 
BERKER, R.: Sur certaines proprietes du rotationnel d'un champ vectoriel qui est 
nul sur la frontiere de son domaine de definition. Bull. sei. math. (2) 73, 163-176. 
Abstract, C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 228, 1630-1632. (116, 119) 
BERKER, R.: Inegalite verifee par l'energie einetique d'un fluide visqueux incompressible occupant un domaine spatial borne. Bull. tech. Univ. Istanbul 2, 41-50. 
Summary, C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 228, 1327-1329. (93) 
CoRBEN, C.: The transformation theory of thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. (2) 76, 
166. (251) 
CuRnss, C. F., and J. 0. HIRSCHFELDER: Transport properlies of multicomponent 
gas mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. 17, 550-555. (295) 
DoNDER, T. DE, et F. H. VAN DEN DUNGEN: Sur [es prineipes variationnels des 
milieux continus. Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., Cl. Sei. (5) 35, 841-846. (236A) 
ERGUN, A. N.: Same cases of superposable fluid motions. Comm. fac. sei. Ankara 
2, 48-88. (114) 
ER TEL, H., u. C.-G. RossBY: Ein neuer Erhaltungssatz der Hydrodynamik. 
Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, math. nat. Kl. 1949, 1 -11. (130) 
List of Works Cited. 775 
8. ERTEL, H., and C.-G. RossBY: A new conservation theorem of hydrodynamics. 
Geofisica pura appl. 14, 189-193. (130) 
9. ERTEL, H., u. H. KöHLER: Ein Theorem über die stationäre Wirbelbewegung 
kompressibler Flüssigkeiten. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 29, 109-113. (139, 163) 
10. FINCK, J. L.: Thermodynamics: the meaning of the first law, and its relation to 
the behavior of material systems. Phys. Rev. (2) 67, 166. (253) 
11. FINZI, B., e M. PASTOR!: Calcolo Tensoriale e Applicazioni. Bologna: Zanichelli. 
vii + 427 pp. (164, 226) 
12. GLEYZAL, A.: A mathematical formulation of the general continuous deformation 
problem. Quart. appl. Math. 6, 429-437. (66B, 210) 
13. HENCKY, H.: Mathematical principles of rheology. Research 2, 437-443. (33A, 
90) 
14. HrcKs, B. L.: On the characterization of fields of diabatic flow. Quart. appl. 
Math. 6, 405-416. (132) 
15. KoNDO, K.: A proposal of a new theory concerning the yielding of materials based 
on Riemannian geometry. J. Japan Soc. appl. Mech. 2, 123-128, 146-151. (34) 
16. LAMER, V. K.: Some current misconceptions of N. L.Sadi Carnot's memoir and 
cycle. Seience 109, 598. (240) 
17. MANARINI, M.: Sui paradossi di d' Alembert e di Brillouin nella dinamica dei 
fluidi. Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. (3) 4, 352-353. (202) 
18. McVITTIE, G. C.: A systematic treatment of moving axes in hydrodynamics. Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Lond. A 196, 285-300. (144, 152, 154, 211, 241) 
19. MoREAU, J.-J.: Sur l'interpretation tourbillonaire des surfaces de glissement. C. R. 
Acad. Sei., Paris 228, 1923-1925. (186) 
20. MoREAU, J .-J.: Sur Ia dynamique d'un ecoulement rotationnel. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 229, 100-102. (117) 
21. NEMENYI, P., and R. PRIM: On the steady Beltrami flow of a perfect gas. Proc. 
7th Int. Congr. Appl. Mech. (1948) 2, 300-314. (132) 
22. PARTINGTON, J. R.: An Advanced Treatise on Physical Chemistry, vol. 1. London, 
New York and Toronto. (239, 240, 245) 
23. PERETTI, G.: Significato del tensore arbitrario ehe interviene neU' integrale generale delle equazioni della statica dei continui. Atti Sem. Mat. Fis. Univ. Modena 
3, 77-82. (227) 
24. PRIGOGINE, I.: Le domaine de Ia validite de Ia thermodynamique des phenomenes 
irreversibles. Physica, Haag 15, 272-284. (259) 
25. PRIM, R.: A note on the substitution prineiple for steady gas flow. J. appl. Phys. 
20, 448-450. (132) 
26. RicHTER, H.: Verzerrungstensor, Verzerrungsdeviator, und Spannungstensor bei 
endlichen Formänderungen. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 29, 65-75. (32, 33) 
27. SIGNORINI, A.: Trasformazioni termoelastiche finite, Memoria 2a. Ann. Mat. (4) 
30, 1-72. (256A) 
28. STORCH!, E.: lntegrazione delle equazioni indefinite della statica dei sistemi continui su una superfieie di rotazione. Rend. Lincei (8) 7, 227-231. (229) 
29. SuPINO, G.: Sul moto irrotazionale dei liquidi viscosi, I. Rend. Lincei (8) 6, 615-620. 
(113) 
30. SWAINGER, K. H.: Saint-Venant's and Filon's finite strains: definitions non-linear 
in displacement gradients. Nature, Lond. 164, 23-24. (33A) 
31. THOMAS, T. Y.: The fundamental hydrodynamical equations and shock conditions 
for gases. Math. Mag. 22, 169-189. (192) 
32. TONOLO, A.: Sopra una classe di deformazioni finite. Ann. Mat. (4) 29, 99-114. 
(27) 
33. TRUESDELL, C.: A new definition of a fluid, I. The Stokesian fluid. Proc. 7th lnt. 
Congr. Appl. Mech. (1948) 2, 351-364 = U.S. Naval Res. Lab. Rep. No. P-3457. 
(293, 298, 299) 
34. TRUESDELL, C.: A new definition of a fluid, Il. The Maxwellian fluirj. U.S. Naval 
Res. Lab. Rep. No. P-3553 = [1351, 27]. (293, 307) 
35. TRUESDELL, C.: Deux formes de Ia transformation de Green. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 229, 1199-1200. (118) 
36. WEISSENBERG, K.: Geometry of rheological phenomena (1946-1947). The Prineiples of Rheological Measurement, pp. 36-65. London. (32) 
37. WEISSENBERG, K.: Abnormal substances and abnormal phenomena of flow. Proc. 
Int. Congr. Rheology (1948), 1-29 - I-46. (42) 
38. WEYL, H.: Shock waves in arbitrary fluids. Comm. pure appl. Math. N.Y. Univ. 
2, 103- 122. (265) 
776 
39. 
1950 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classica! Field Theories. 
ZERNA, W.: Beitrag zur allgemeinen Schalenbiegetheorie. Ing.-Arch. 17, 149-164. 
(213) 
ALFVEN, H.: Cosmical Electrodynamics. London. (313) 
BLOKH, V.: Stress functions in the theory of elasticity [in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. 
Mekh. 14, 415-422. (227, 228) 
CASTOLDI, L.: Linee sostanziali inestese neUe deformazioni finite dei continui 
materiali. Atti Accad. Ligure 6, 165-169. (26) 
CASTOLDI, L.: Linee sostanziali nel moto un continuo deformabile e moti con linee 
di f!usso (e di corrente) "sostanzialmente permanente". Rend. Ist. Lombardo (3) 
14, 259-264. (75) 
CRocco, L.: On a kind of stress-function for the study of non-isentropic two-dimensional motion of gases. Proc. 7th Int. Congr. Appl. Mech. London (1948) 2, 315-329. 
(224) 
DELVAL, J.: Le principe de Ia moindre cantrainte applique a Ia dynamique des 
fluides incompressibles. Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., Cl. Sei. (5) 36, 639-648. (130) 
ERTEL, H.: Ein Theorem über asynchron-periodische Wirbelbewegungen kompressibler Flüssigkeiten. Mise. Acad. Berol. 1, 62-68. (135) 
GoRDON, A. N.: A linear theory of finite strain. Nature, Land. 166, 657. (33A) 
GREEN, A. E., and W. ZERNA: The equilibriurrt of thin elastic shells. Quart. J. 
Mech. appl. Math. 3, 9-22. (213) 
GREEN, A. E., and W. ZERNA: Theory of elasticity in general Coordinates. Phi!. 
Mag. (7) 41, 313-336. (12, 34, 66B) 
HöLDER, E.: Über die Variationsprinzipe der Mechanik der Kontinua. Ber. Verh. 
Akad. Wiss. Leipzig 97, No. 2, 13 pp. (236A) 
IRVING, J ., and J. KIRKWOOD: The statistical mechanical theory of transport 
processes. IV, The equations of hydrodynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 18, 817-829. (1) 
JoHNSON, M. H., and E. 0. HuLBERT: Diffusion in the ionosphere. Phys. Rev. 
(2) 79, 802-807. (295) 
KoNDO, K.: On the dislocation, the group of holonomy and the theory of yielding. 
J. Japan Soc. appl. Mech. 3, 107-11 o. ( 34) 
KoNDO, K.: On the fundamental equations of the theory of yielding. J. Japan 
Soc. appl. Mech. 3, 184-188. (34) 
KoNno, K.: The mathematical analyses of the yield point. J. Japan Soc. appl. 
Mech. 3, 188-195; 4, 4-8, 35-38 (1951). (34) 
MASON, W. P.: Piezoelectric Crystals and their Application to Ultrasonics. Toronto, 
New York and London: D. van Nostrand. (312) 
MoREAU, J .-J.: Relations generales directes entre !es actions aerodynamiques et 
!es elements tourbillonaires. Actes Congr. lnt. Mec. Poitiers 4, 6 pp. (117) 
MoRINAGA, K., and T. NöNo: On stress-functions in general Coordinates. J. sei. 
Hiroshima Univ. A 14, 181-194. (227, 230) 
NADAI, A.: Theory of Flow and Fracture of Solids, 1, 2nd ed. New York. (24) 
Ein Kapitel aus der Vorlesung von F. NEUMANN über mechanische Wärmetheorie. 
Königsberg 1854/55. Ausgearbeitet von C. NEUMANN. Herausgeg. von E. R. NEUMANN. 
Abh. bayer. Akad. Wiss., math.-nat. Kl. (2), No. 59. (245) 
0LDROYD, J. G.: On the formulation of rheological equations of state. Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Land. A 200, 523-541. (66, 66B, 104, 150, 293) 
OLDROYD, J. G.: Finite strains in an anisotropic elastic continuum. Proc. Roy. 
Soc. Land. A 202, 345-358. (33A, 34) 
PRIM, R., and C. TRUESDELL: A derivation of Zorawski's criterion for permanent 
vector-lines. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1, 32-34. (75) 
SCHLÜTER, A.: Dynamik des Plasmas I. Z. Naturforsch. Sa, 72-78. (295) 
SEUGLING, W. R.: Equations of compatibility for finite deformation of a continuous 
medium. Amer. Math. monthly 57, 679-681. (34) 
STORCH!, E.: Sulle equazioni indefinite della statica delle membrane tese su generiebe superficie. Rend. Lincei 8, 116-120. (229) 
STORCH!, E.: Integrazione delle equazioni indefinite della statica dei veli tesi su 
una generica superficie. Rend. Lincei 8, 326-331. (229) 
SwAINGER, K. H.: Non-coaxiality of principal normal stresses and the 'strain' 
ellipsoid in the classical theory an infinitesimal deformation. Nature, Land. 165, 
159-160. (33A) 
SwAINGER, K. H.: Reply to critism of Gordon [1950, 8]. Nature, Land. 166, 
657-659. (33A) 
SYNGE, J. L.: Note an the kinematics of plane viscous motion. Quart. appl. Math. 
8, 107-108. (116) 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
1951 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
List of Works Cited. 777 
TRUESDELL, C.: A new definition of a fluid, I. The Stokesian fluid. J. Math. 
pures appl. (9) 29, 215-244. (293, 298, 299) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Bernoulli's theorem for viscous compressible fluids. Phys. Rev. 
77, 535-536. (124) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On the balance between deformation and rotation in the motion 
of a continuous medium. J. Washington Acad. Sei. 40, 313-317. (115, 160) 
WEYL, H.: Space-time-matter (English transl. of [1921, 6], with a new preface). 
New York: Dover (266, 310) 
ZERNA, W.: Allgemeine Grundgleichungen der Elasticitätstheorie. Ing.-Arch. 18, 
211-220. (34) 
BEGHIN, H.: Sur Ia notation de travail dans Ia mecanique du continu. Ann. Inst. 
Fourier Grenoble 2 (1950), 173-184. (217) 
BJORGUM, 0.: On Beltrami vector fields and flows, Part I. Univ. Bergen Arbok 
1951, Naturv. rekke No. 1. (112, 117) 
DEDECKER, P.: Sur Je theoreme de Ia circulation de V. Bjerknes et Ia theorie 
des invariants integraux. Pub!. Inst. R. Meteorol. Belg. misc. No. 36, 63 pp. 
(129) 
DEDECKER, P.: Sur le theoreme de Ia circulation de V. Bjerknes. Mem. Inst. 
R. Meteorol. Belg. 48, 4 pp. (129) 
DIRAC, P. A. M.: A new classical theory of the electron, I. II, III. Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond. A209, 291-296; A212, 330-339; A223, 438-445. (276) 
FINCK, J. L.: Thermodynamics from a Generalized Standpoint. New York. _ (253) 
FrLONENKo-BoRODICH, M_ M_: The problern of the equilibrium of an elastic parallelepiped subject to assigned Ioads on its boundaries [in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 
15, 137-148. (227) 
FrLONENKO-BORODICH, M_ M.: Two problems on the equilibrium of an elastic parallelepiped [in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 15, 563-574. (227) 
GALIMOV, K. Z.: Invariant form of the conditions of compatibility in finite deformation [in Russian]. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR. 77, 577-580. (34) 
GrESE, J. H.: Streamfunctions for three-dimensional flows. J. Math. Phys. 30, 
31-35. (163) 
HAASE, R.: Zur Thermodynamik der irreversiblen Prozesse. Z. Naturforsch. 6a, 
420-437. 522-540. (245) 
IRVING, J. H., and R. W. ZwANZIG: The statistical mechanical theory of transport 
processes. V. Quantum hydrodynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 19, 1173-1180. (1, 2) 
J ARRE, G.: Sul moto relativo nei mezzi continui. Atti Accad. Torino 85, 183-191. 
(146) 
J OHNSON, M. H.: Diffusion as hydrodynamic motion. Phys. Rev. (2) 84, 566-568. 
(295) 
LonGE, A. S.: The compatibility conditions for !arge strains. Quart. J. Mech. 
appl. Math. 4, 85-93. (34) 
LonGE, A. S.: On the use of convected coordinate systems in the mechanics of 
continuous media. Proc. Cambridge Phi!. Soc_ 47, 57 5-584. (66, 66 B, 293) 
MAZUR, P., et I._PRIGOGINE: S_ur l'hydrodynamique des melanges liquides de 
He3 et He4• Physica, Haag 17, 680-693. (215, 243, 259) 
MuRNAGHAN, F. D.: Finite Deformation of an Elastic Solid. New York and London. (12) 
PoPov, S. G.: Remark on the integrals of Bernoulli and Lagrange (Cauchy). 
[in Russian]. Moskov. Gos. Univ. Zap. 152, Mekh_ 3, 43-46. (125) 
FRAGER, W., and P. G. HoDGE jr.: Theory of Perfectly Plastic Solids. New York. 
(24) 
PRIGOGINE, 1., et P. MAZUR: Sur deux formulations de l'hydrodynamique et Je 
problerne de l'helium liquide II. Physica, Haag 17, 661-679. (215, 243, 258, 259) 
RrvLIN, R. S., and D. W. SAUNDERS: Large elastic deformations of isotropic 
materials, VII. Experiments on the deformation of rubber. Phi!. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. Land. A 243, 251-288. (40) 
ScHLÜTER, A.: Dynamik des Plasmas II. Z. Naturforsch. 6a, 73-78. (295) 
SMITH-WHITE, W. B.: The Poisson-Kelvin hypothesis and the theory of dielectrics. 
J. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales 85,82-112- (283) 
SYNGE, J. L.: Conditions satisfied by the expansion and vorticity of a viscous 
fluid in a fixed container. Quart. appl. Math. 9, 319-322. (116) 
TORRE, C.: Über die physikalische Bedeutung der Mohrsehen Hüllkurve. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 31, 275-277. (24) 
TRUESDELL, C.: A new definition of a fluid. I I. The Maxwellian fluid. J. Math. 
pures appl. 30, 111-158. (293, 304, 307) 
778 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
1952 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The C!assical Field Theories. 
TRUESDELL, C.: Vorticity averages. Canad. J. Math. 3, 69-86. (117, 118, 131) 
TRUESDELL, C.: A form of Green's transformation. Amer. J. Math. 73, 43-47. 
(112, 117) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Caracterisation des champs vectoriels qui s'annulent sur une 
frontiere fermee. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 232, 1277-1279. (116) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Analogue tri-dimensionnel au theoreme de M. Synge sur !es 
champs vectoriels plans qui s'annulent sur une frontiere fermee. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 232, 1396-1397· (116) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Vereinheitlichung und Verallgemeinerung der Wirbelsätze ebener 
und rotationssymmetrischer Gasbewegungen. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 31, 65-71. 
An abstract under the title "A new vorticity theorem" appears in Proc. Int. Congr. 
Math. (1950), 1, 639-640 (1952). (132, 133) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On Ertel's vorticity theorem. Z. angew. Math. Phys. 2, 109-114. 
(130) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Proof that Ertel's vorticity theorem holds in average for any 
medium suffering no tangential acceleration on the boundary. Geofis. pura appl. 
19, No. 3-4, 1-3. (131) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On the equation of the bounding surface. Bull. Tech. Univ. Istanbul 
3, 71-77. (182, 184) 
TRUESDELL, C.: On the velocity of sound in fluids. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 18, 501. (297) 
VAN DEN DuNGEN, F.: Note on the Hamel-Synge theorem. Quart. appl. Math. 
9, 203-204. (116) 
VERSCHAFFELT, J. E.: La thermomecanique des phenomenes de transport. J .Phys 
Radium 12, 93-98. (159) 
WHITTAKER, E. T.: A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, vol. 1. 
New York. (266, 276, 283, 289, 302, 308) 
ARZHANIKH, I. S.: Tensor stress functions of hydrodynamics [in Russian]. Dokl. 
Akad. Nauk SSSR. 83, 195-198. (211, 230) 
CoBURN, N.: Intrinsic relations satisfied by the vorticity and velocity vectors in 
fluid flow theory. Michigan Math. J. 1, 113-130; 2, 41-44 (1953). (99, 110) 
DE GROOT, S. R.: Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes. Amsterdam: NorthHolland Pub!. Co. xvi + 242 pp. (158, 243, 245, 255, 257, 259, 261, 295, 306) 
ER TEL, H. : Über die physikalische Bedeutung von Funktionen, welche in der 
C!ebsch-Tra~sformation der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen auftreten. Sitzgsber. 
Akad. Wiss. Berlin, Kl. Math. allg. Naturw. 1952, No. 3. (135) 
F:ENYES, I.: Die Anwendung der mathematischen Prinzipien der Mechanik in der 
Thermodynamik. Z. Physik 132, 140-145. (251) 
F:ENYES, I.: Ergänzungen zur axiomatischen Begründung der Thermodynamik. 
Z. Physik 134, 95-100. (245) 
GRAD, H.: Statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, and fluid dynamics of systems 
with an arbitrary number of integrals. Comm. pure appl. math. 5, 455-494. (157, 
205) 
GRIOLI, G.: Relazioni quantitative per lo stato tensionale di un qualunque sistema 
continuo e per Ia deformazione di un corpo elastico in equilibrio. Ann. di Mat. 
(4) 33, 239-246. (221, 222) 
GRIOLI, G.: Integrazione del problema della statica delle piastre omogenee di spessore 
qualunque. Ann. Scuola Norm. Pisa (3) 6, 31-49. (222) 
HEINRICH, G.: Der Energietransport in strömenden Medien. Z. angew. Math. 
Mech. 32, 286-288. (217) 
HERSHEY, A. V.: A review of the definitions of finite strain. Proc. 1st U.S. Nat. 
Congr. Appl. Mech. (1951), 473-478. (33A) 
KrRKWOOD, J. G., and B. CRAWFORD jr.: The macroscopic equations of transport 
J. Physic. Chem. 56, 1048-1051. (243, 285, 295) 
MoREAU, J .-J 0: Bilan dynamique d'un ecoulement rotationnel. J 0 Math. pures 
appl. (9) 31, 355-375; 32, 1-78 (1953). (117, 130, 186, 297) 
NARDINI, R.: Sul valore medio dello stress per particolari sollecitazioni. Ann. Univ. 
Ferrara sez. VII (2) 1, 89-91. (220) 
PARTINGTON, J. R.: Advances in thermodynamics. Nature, Lond. 170, 730-732. 
(245) 
PRIM, R. C.: Steady rotational flow of ideal gases ( 1949). J. Rational Mech. Anal. 
1, 425-497. (111, 132, 133) 
RrcHTER, H.: Zur Elasticitätstheorie endlicher Verformungen. Math. Nachr. 8, 
65-73. (37) 
STORCH!, E.: Le superficie eccezionali nella statica delle membrane. Rev. mat. 
Univ. Parma 3, 339-360. (229) 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
1953 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
List of Works Cited. 779 
SZEBEHELY, V. G.: Generalization of the dimensionless frequency parameter in 
unsteady flows. David Taylor Model Basin Rep. 833. (100) 
ToNoLo, A.: Sopra un problema di Darboux della meccanica dei mezzi continui. 
Ann. Univ. Ferrara sez. VII (2) 1, 103-109. (38) 
TRUESDELL, C.: The mechanical foundations of elasticity and fluid dynamics. 
J. Rational Mech. Anal. 1, 125-300. (12, 14, 17, 29, 33A, 34, 44, 46, 50, 57, 95, 
96, 210, 256A, 293, 298, 299, 303) 
TRUESDELL, C.: A program of physical research in classical mechanics. Z. angew. 
Math. Phys. 3, 79-95. (2, 293, 298, 299) 
TRUESDELL, C.: Vorticity and the Thermodynamic State in a Gas Flow. Mem. 
sei. math. No. 119, Paris. (132, 133, 297) 
\VHAPLES, G.: Caratheodory's temperature equations. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 
1, 301-307. (245) 
BILIMOVITCH, A.: Sur l'homogenisation des equations de nature velocidique. 
Acad. Serbe Sei. Pub!. Inst. Math. 5, 29-34. (115, 160) 
BJ0RGUM, 0., and T. GoDAL: On Beltrami vector vields and flows, Part I I. Univ. 
Bergen Arbok 1952, Naturv. rekke No. 13. 
CARSTOIU, I.: Sur la detormation d'une particule dans le mouvement d'un fluide. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 236, 2209-2211. (101) 
CASTOLDI, L.: Teoremi di Bernoulli per fluidi comprimibili viscosi. Atti Accad. 
Ligure 9 (1952), 215-222. (125) 
CASTOLDI, L.: Sui moti di fluidi reali per cui si verifica una esatta linearizzazione 
della equazione dinamica. Atti Accad. Ligure 9 (1952), 222-227. (122, 127) 
CoRSON, E. M.: Introduction to Tensors, Spinors and Relativistic Wave-Equations 
(Relation Structure). New York. (282) 
DARWIN, C.: Note on hydrodynamics. Proc. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 49, 342-354. 
(71) 
DEFRISE, P.: Analyse geometrique de la cinematique des milieux continus. Inst. 
R. Meteorol. Belg. Pub!. ser. B, No. 16, 63 pp. (12, 152, 153) 
DE GROOT, S.: Hydrodynamics and thermodynamics. Proc. Symp. appl. Math. 
4, 87-99. (245) 
FoRTAK, H.: Zur Bedeutung der in der Clebsch-Transformation der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen auftretenden Funktionen. Acta Hydrophys. 1, 145-150. (135) 
GEIRINGER, H.: Some recent results in the theory of an ideal plastic body. Adv. 
appl. Mech. 3, 197-294. (300) 
GRIOLI, G.: Proprietä. di media ed equilibrio elastico. Atti 4to Congr. Un. Mat. 
Ital. (1951) 1, 68-77. (221, 222) 
HoWARD, L. N.: Constant speed flows. Thesis, MS in Princeton University Library. 
(111) 
KILCHEVSKI, N. A.: Stress, velocity, and density functions in static and dynamic 
problems in the mechanics of continuous media [in Russian]. Dokl. Akad. Nauk 
SSSR. 92, 895-898. (228, 230) 
LANG HAAR, H.: An invariant membrane stress function for shells. J. appl. Mech. 
20, 178-182. (229) 
LANG HAAR, H.: The principle of complementary energy in nonlinear elasticity 
theory. J. Franklin Inst. 256, 255-264. (232A) 
MASUDA, H.: A new proof of Lagrange's theorem in hydrodynamics. J. Phys. 
Soc. Japan 8, 390-393- (136) 
McVrTTIE, G. C.: A method of solution of the equations of classical gas dynamics 
using Einstein's equations. Quart. appl. Math. 11, 327-336. (225, 230) 
Mr~rcu, M.: Echilibrul mediilor continue cu deformäri märi. Acad. Repub. Pop. 
Romane. Stud. Cerc. Mec. Metalurgie 4, 31-53. (12) 
NYBORG, W. L.: Acoustic streaming equations: laws of rotational motion for fluid 
elements. J. Acoust. Soc. 25, 938-944. (170) 
PLATRIER, C.: Conditions d'integrabilite du tenseur de deformation totale dans 
une transformation finie d'un milieu ä. trois dimensions. Ann. Ponts Chaussees 
123, 703-709. (34) 
PLATRIER, C.: Conditions d'integrabilite du tenseur de detormation totale dans 
une transformation finie d'un milieu ä. trois dimensions. Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., 
CL Sei. (5) 39, 490-494. (34) 
FRAGER, W.: Three-dimensional plastic flow under uniform stress. Brown univ. 
tech. rep. No. 95, August = Rev. fac. sei. Univ. Istanbul 19, 23-27 (1954). (142) 
PRATELLI, A.: Principi variazionali nella meccanica dei fluidi. Rend. Ist. Lombardo 
(3) 17 (86), 484-500. (94, 163) 
780 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
25. PRATELLI, A.: Sulla stazionarieta di significativi integrali nella meccanica dei 
continui. Rend. Ist. Lombardo (3) 17 (86), 714-724. (227, 235) 
26. REIK, H.: Zur Theorie irreversibler Vorgänge. Ann. Physik (6) 11, 270-284, 
407-419, 420-428; 13, 73-96. (245) 
27. REISSNER, E.: On a variational theorem for finite elastic deformations. J. Math. 
Phys. 32, 129-135. (232A) 
28. ScHAEFER, H.: Die Spannungsfunktionen des dreidimensionalen Kontinuums und 
des elastischen Körpers. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 33, 356-362. (226, 227, 229) 
29. STORCH!, E.: Sulle membrane aventi comportamento meeeanieo eceezionale. Rend. 
Ist. Lombardo (3) 17 (86), 462-483. (229) 
30. SzEBEHELY, V. G.: A measure of unsteadiness of time-dependent flows. Proe. 
3rd Midwest Conf. on Fluid Mech., Univ. Minn., 221-231. (100) 
31. TRUESDELL, C.: Two measures of vorticity. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 173-217. 
(Partial abstract in Proc. Int. Congr. theor. appl. Mech. Istanbul 1952.) (91, 100, 
121) 
32. TRUESDELL, C.: Corrections and additions to "The mechanieal foundations of 
elasticity and fluid dynamics". J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 593-616. (12, 14, 
28, 37, 150, 304) 
33. TRUESDELL, C.: Generalization of a geometrical theorem of Euler. Comm. mat. 
Helv. 27, 233-234. (142) 
34. TRUESDELL, C.: La velocita massima nel moto di Gromeka-Beltrami. Rend. Lineei 
(8) 13 (1952), 378-379- (121) 
35. WHITTAKER, E. T.: A History of the Theories of Aether and Elastieity, vol. I I. 
London: Nelson. (266) 
36. YosHIMURA, Y.: On the natural shearing strain. Proc. 2nd Japan Mat. Congr. 
appl. Mech. (1952), 1-4. (33A) 
37. YoSHIMURA, Y.: On the definition of stress in the finite deformation theory. J. 
Phys. Soc. Japan 8, 669-673- (210) 
1954 1. CARSTOIU, I.: Vorticity and deformation in fluid mechanics. J. Rational Mech. 
Anal. 3, 691-712. (101, 160) 
2. CASTOLDI, L.: Le .,condizioni di congruenza" per deformazioni infinitesime non 
lineari. Atti Ist. Veneto, Cl. sei. mat. nat. 112, 41-47. (54, 57) 
3. CASTOLDI, L.: Sopra un classificazione dei comportamenti elastici dei mezzi deformabili. Atti Ist. Veneto, Cl. sei. mat. nat. 112, 1 7-30. (55) 
4. DEAN, W. R.: Note on the motion of an infinite cylinder in a rotating viseous 
liquid. Quart. J. Mech. appl. Math. 7, 25 7-262. (207) 
5. DuGAS, R.: La Mecanique au XVIIe Siecle. Ed. Griffon, Neuchatel. 620 pp. (3) 
6. ERICKSEN, J. L., and R. S. RrvLrN: Large elastic deformations of homogeneaus 
anisotropic materials. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 3, 281-301. (49, 62, 233) 
7. GREEN, A. E., and W. ZERNA: Theoretical Elastieity. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
xiii + 442 pp. (12, 66 B) 
8. GüNTHER, W.: Spannungsfunktionen und Verträglichkeitsbedingungen der Kontinuumsmechanik Abh. Braunschweig. Wiss. Ges. 6, 207-219. (227, 229) 
9. HIRSCHFELDER, J. 0., C. F. CURTISS, and R. B. BIRD: Moleeu!ar Theory of Gases 
and Liquids. New York: Wiley. xxvi + 1219 pp. (215, 243, 259, 295) 
10. KoNDO, K.: On the theory of'the mechanieal behavior of mieroscopieally nonuniform materials. Research notes Res. Assn. appl. Geom. (Tokyo) (2), No. 4, 
37 pp. (34) 
11. KRÖNER, E.: Die Spannungsfunktion der dreidimensionalen isotropen Elastizitätstheorie. Z. Physik 139, 175-188. Correction, Z. Physik 143, 374 (1955). (227) 
11 A. LAMM, 0.: The formal theory of diffusion, and its relation to self-diffusion, Sedimentation equilibrium, and viscosity. Acta Chem. Scand. 8, 1120-1128. (295) 
12. LANGHAAR, H., and M. STIPPES: Three-dimensional stress functions. J. Franklin 
Inst. 258,371-382. (227) 
13. LoDE, W.: Tensoren zur Berechnung großer Formänderungen. Kolloid-Z. 138, 
28-38. (33A) 
14. MANACORDA, T.: Sopra un prineipio variazionale di E. Reissner per Ia statica dei 
mezzi continui. Bol!. Un. Mat. Ital. (3) 9, 154-159- (232A) 
15. MAZZARELLA, F.: Determinazione delle componenti di secondo ordine della deformazione riferite ad un generico sistema di coordinate eurvilinee. Rend. Accad. 
Napoli (4) 21, 107-114. (26) 
16. 0RNSTEIN, W.: Stress functions of Maxwell and Morera. Quart. appl. Math. 12, 
198-201. (227) 
17. OsBORN, H.: The existence of conservation laws. Appl. math. stat. Iab. Stanford 
tech. rep. 27 (70 pp.). Also Ann. of Math. 69, 105-118 (1959). (157) 
List of Works Cited. 781 
18. PARKER, E. N.: Tensor virial equations. Phys. Rev. (2) 96, 1686-1689. (219) 
19. REIK, H.: Die Thermodynamik irreversibler Prozesse und ihre Anwendung auf 
Transportphänomene. Z. Physik 137, 333-361, 463-493. (245) 
20. REINER, M.: Second order effects in elasticity and hydrodynamics. Bull. Res. 
Council Israel 3, 372-379. (33A) 
21. ScHaUTEN, J. A.: Ricci-calculus, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer. xx + 516 pp. (34, 150, 
152, 268) 
22. SIGNORINI, A.: Una espressiva applicazione delle proprieta di medio dello stress 
comuni a tutti i sistemi continui. Studies math. mech. pres. R. v. Mises. New 
York: Academic Press. 274-277. (222) 
23. SwAINGER, K.: Analysis of Deformation. I. Mathematical Theory. London: 
xix + 285 pp. (33A) 
24. TRUESDELL, C.: The Kinematics of Vorticity. Indiana Univ. sei. ser. No. 19. 
(12, 66A, 72, 78, 101, 102, 108, 110, 112, 114, 118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125, 129, 
130, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137, 138, 145) 
25. TRUESDELL, C.: Rational fluid mechanics 1687-1765. L. Euleri Opera Omnia 
(2) 12, IX-CXXV. (66A, 120, 130, 200) 
26. WHITHAM, G. B.: A note on a paper by G. C. McVittie. Quart. appl. Math. 12, 
316-318. (230) 
1955 1. ADKINS, J.: A note on the finite plane-strain equations for isotropic incompressible 
materials. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 51, 363-367. (47) 
2. BILBY, B. A., R. BuLLOUGH and E. SMITH: Continuous distributions of dislocations: 
a new application of the methods of non-Riemannian geometry. Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond., Ser. A 231, 263-273. (34) 
3. BJ0RGUM, 0.: On the physical boundary conditions in fluid dynamics. Univ. 
Bergen Arbok, Naturv. rekke Nr. 4, 8 pp. (105) 
4. CoTTER, B., and R. S. RrvLIN: Tensors associated with time-dependent stress. 
Quart. appl. Math. 13, 177-182. (UJJ, 150, 293, 305) 
5. ERICKSEN, J. L.: Note concerning the number of directions which, in a given 
motion, suffer no instantaneous rotation. J. Washington Acad. Sei. 45, 65-66. 
(78, 91) 
6. ERICKSEN, J. L.: Deformations possible in every compressible, isotropic, perfectly 
elastic material. J. Math. Phys. 34, 126-128. (34) 
7. ERTEL, H.: Kanonischer Algorithmus hydrodynamischer Wirbelgleichungen. 
Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Berlin 1954, No. 4, 11 pp. (130) 
8. ERTEL, H.: Ein neues Wirbel-Theorem der Hydrodynamik. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. 
Berlin, math. Kl. 1954, No. 5. 12 pp. (130) 
9. FINZI, L.: Sulle equazioni di Pucher nell' equilibrio delle strutture a guscio. Rend. 
Ist. Lombardo (3) 88, 907-916. (229) 
10. GRIOLI, G.: Limitazioni per lo stato tensionale di un qualunque sistema continuo. 
Ann. di Mat. (4) 39, 255-266. (222) 
11. GYORGYI, G.: Die Bewegung des Energiemittelpunktes und der Energie-ImpulsTensor des elektromagnetischen Feldes in Dielektrika. Acta phys. Hung. 4, 121-131. 
(284) 
12. HEINRICH, G.: Der Energiestrom in elastischen Medien. Öst. Ing.-Arch. 9, 
148-156. (217) 
13. HERIVEL, J.: The derivation of the equations of motion of an ideal fluid by Hamilton's principle. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 51, 344-349. (236A) 
14. HUNT, F. V.: Notes on the exact equations governing the propagation of sound 
in fluids. J. Acoust. Soc. Amer. 27, 1019-1039. (257) 
15. ]AIN, M. K.: The motion of an infinite cylinder in rotating non-Newtonian liquid. 
Z. angew. Math. Mech. 35, 379-381. (207) 
16. MARGUERRE, K.: Ansätze zur Lösung der Grundgleichungen der Elastizitätstheorie. 
Z. angew. Math. Mech. 35, 242-263. (228) 
17. McVITTIE, G. C.: Review of [1954. 24]. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 61, 356-358. (99) 
18. NoLL, W.: On the continuity of the solid and fluid states. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 
4, 13-81. (12, 37, 66B, 95, 207, 293, 303, 304, 305) 
19. NoLL, W.: Die Herleitung der Grundgleichungen der Thermomechanik der Kontinua aus der statischen Mechanik. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 4, 627-646. (1, 262) 
20. RICHTER, H.: Review of [1954, 23]. Zbl. Math. 56, 175-1i6. (33A) 
21. RrvLIN, R. S., and J. L. ERICKSEN: Stress-deformation relations for isotropic 
materials. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 4, 323-425. (33, 104, 143, 144, 149, 293, 304, 
305) 
22. ScHAEFER, H.: Die Spannungsfunktion einer Dyname. Abh. Braunschweig. Wiss. 
Ges. 7, 107-112. (227) 
782 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
23. SPEISER, A.: Einleitung. L. Euleri Opera Omnia (1) 28, VII-XLIV. (33A) 
24. THOMAS, T. Y.: On the structure of the stress-strain relations. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sei. U.S.A. 41, 716-720. (148, 293) 
25. THOMAS, T. Y.: Kinematically preferred co-ordinate systems. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sei. U.S.A. 41, 762-770. (148, 293) 
26. TRUESDELL, C.: I. The first three sections of Euler's treatise on fluid mechanics 
( 1 766); II. The theory of aerial sound ( 1687- 1788); III. Rational fluid mechanics 
(1765-1788). L. Euleri Opera Omnia (2) 13, VII-CXVIII. (66A) 
27. TRUESDELL, C.: The simplest rate theory of pure elasticity. Comm. pure appl. 
Math. 8, 123-132. (142, 304) 
28. TRUESDELL, C.: Hypo-elasticity. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 4, 83-133, 1019-1020. 
(223, 293, 304) 
29. TRUESDELL, C.: Review of [1954, 23]. Math. Rev. 16, 307. (33A) 
1956 1. BERKER, R.: Sur les equations de compatibilite relativesau mouvement d'un gaz. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 242, 342-344. (110) 
2. BRESSAN, A.: Sulla possibilita di stabilire limitazioni inferiori per le componenti 
intrinseche del tensore degli sforzi in coordinate generali. Rend. Sem. Mat. Padova 
26, 139-147. (222) 
3. CoLONNETTI, G.: L'equilibre des voiles minces hyperstatiques (Le cas des voiles 
de surface minimum). C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 243, 1087-1089, 1701-1704. (229) 
4. DoRN, W. S., and A. ScHILD: A converse to the virtual work theorem for deformable solids. Quart. appl. Math. 14, 209-213. (227, 234) 
5. DoYLE, T. C., and J. L. ERICKSEN: Nonlinear elasticity. Adv. appl. Mech. 4, 
53-115. (12, 14, 18) 
6. ELSASSER, W. M.: Hydromagnetic dynamo theory. Rev. Mod. Phys. 28, 135-163. 
(313) 
7. FINZI, L.: Legame fra equilibrio e congruenza e suo significato fisics, Rend. Lincei 
(8) 20, 205-211, 338-342. (84, 224, 234) 
8. GElS, T.: ".Ähnliche" dreidimensionale Grenzschichten. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 
5, 643-686. (163) 
9. GREEN, A. E.: Hypo-elasticity and plasticity. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., Ser. A 234, 
46-59. (304) 
10. GREEN, A. E.: Hypo-elasticity and plasticity, II. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 5, 
725-734. (304) 
11. HANIN, M., and M. REINER: On isotropic tensor-functions and the measure of 
deformation. Z. angew. Math. Phys. 7, 377-393. (33A) 
12. HASKIND, M. D.: Unsteady motion of a solid in an accelerated flow of an unlimited 
fluid [in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 20, 120-123. (202) 
13. IKENBERRY, E., and C. TRUESDELL: On the pressures and the flux of energy in 
a gas according to Maxwell's kinetic theory, I. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 5, 1-54. 
(307) 
14. KoPPE, E.: Methoden der nichtlinearen Elastizitätstheorie mit Anwendung auf die 
dünne Platte endlicher Durchbiegung. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 36, 455-462. (34) 
15. MARGULIES, G.: Remark on kinematically preferred co-ordinate systems: Proc. 
Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S.A. 42, 152-153. (148) 
16. OLDROYD, J. G., and R. H. THOMAS: The motion of a cylinder in a rotating liquid 
with general elastic and viscous properties. Quart. J.Mech.Appl. Math. 9, 136-139. 
(207) 
17. OswATITSCH, K.: Über eine Verallgemeinerung des Potentials auf Strömungen 
mit Drehung. Öst. lng.-Arch. 10, 239-241. (125) 
18. RAw, C. J. G., and W. YouRGRAU: "Acceleration" of chemical reactions. Nature, 
Lond. 178, 809. (159A) 
19. SPEISER, A.: Einleitung. L. Euleri Opera Omnia (1) 29, VII-XLII. (33A) 
20. ToUPIN, R. A.: The elastic dielectric. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 5, 849-915. (14, 
19, 37, 312) 
21. TRUESDELL, C.: Zur Geschichte des Begriffes "Innerer Druck". Physik. BI. 12, 
315- 326. (200) 
22. TRUESDELL, C.: Review of [1953, 20]. Math. Rev. 17, 97. (170) 
23. TRUESDELL, C.: Experience, theory, and experiment. Proc. 6th Hydraulics Conf., 
bull. 36, Univ. Iowa Stud. Engin., 3-18. (3) 
1957 1. BRAND, L.: The pi theorem of dimensional analysis. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 
1 (1957/58), 34-45. (293) 
2. BRDICKA, M.: On the general form of the Beltrami equation and Papkovich's 
solution of the axially symmetrical problern of the classical theory of elasticity. 
Czech. J. Phys. 7, 262-274. (228) 
List of Works Cited. 783 
3. DuNCAN, W. R.: Analysis of a vector field and some applications to fluid motion. 
Aero. Quart. 8, 207-214. 
4. FILONENKo-BoRomcH, M. M.: On the problern of Lame for the parallelepiped in 
the general case of surface Ioads [in Russian]. Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 21, 550-559. (227) 
5. GRAIFF, F.: Sulle condizioni di congruenza per una membrana. Rend. Ist. Lombardo A 92, 33-42. (84) 
6. GREEN, A. E., and R. S. RrvLIN: The mechanics of non-linear materials with 
memory, Part!. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 1 (1957/58), 1-21. (305) 
7. HAYES, W.: The vorticity jump across a gasdynamic discontinuity. J. Fluid 
Mech. 2, 595-600. (179) 
8. HowARD, L. N.: Divergence formulas involving vorticity. Arch. Rational Mech. 
Anal. 1 (1957/58), 113-123. (119, 131) 
9. MrLNE-THOMSON, L. M.: A general solution of the equations of hydrodynamics. 
J. Fluid Mech. 2, 88. (230) 
10. NACHBAR, W., F. WrLLIAMs and S. S. PENNER: The conservation laws for independent coexistent continua and for multicomponent reacting gas mixtures. Lockheed 
aircraft corp. LMSD 2082, 15 March = Quart. appl. Math. 17, 43-54 (1959). 
(215, 243) 
11. NoLL, W.: On the foundations of the mechanics of continuous media. Carnegie 
Inst. Tech. Rep. No. 17, Air Force Off. Sei. Res. (3, 196, 196A, 211, 293, 305) 
12. NoLL, W.: On the rotation of an incompressible continuous medium in plane 
motion. Quart. appl. Math. 15, 317-319. (161, 207) 
13. STORCH!, E.: Una soluzione delle equazioni indefinite della meccanica dei continui 
negli spazi riemanniani. Rend. Ist. Lombardo 90 (1956), 369-378. (229) 
14. TING, T. W., and J. C. M. LI: Thermodynamics for elastic solids. General formulation. Phys. Rev. (2) 106, 1165-1167. (246) 
15. THOMAS, T. Y.: Extended compatibility conditions for the study of surfaces of 
discontinuity in continuum mechanics. J. Math. Mech. 6, 311-322, 907-908. 
(175, 176, 177, 179, 180, 181) 
16. TRUESDELL, C.: Sulle basi della termomeccanica. Rend. Lincei (8) 22, 33-38, 
158-166. (158, 159, 215, 243, 254, 255, 259) 
17. TRUESDELL, C.: General solution for the stresses in a curved membrane. Proc. 
Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S.A. 43, 1070-1072. (84, 229) 
18. WHITNEY, H.: Geometrie Integration Theory. Princeton Univ. Press. (269) 
19. YIH, C.-S.: Stream functions in three-dimensional flows. Houille Blanche, 
445-450. (164) 
1958 1. ERICKSEN, J. L., and C. TRUESDELL: Exact theory of stress and strain in rods 
and shells. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 1, 295-323. (60, 61, 63A, 64, 212, 214) 
1 A. FERRARESE, G.: Sulla relazione simbolica della meccanica dei sistemi continui 
vincolati. Rend. Mat. e Appl. (5) 14, 305-312. (233) 
2. GoDAL, T.: On Beltrami vector fields and flows, Part III. Same considerations 
on the general case. Univ. Bergen Arbok 1957, Naturv. r. Nr. 12, 28 pp. (108) 
3. GRAIFF, F.: Sulle condizioni di congruenza per deformazioni anche finite. Rend. 
Lincei (8) 24, 415-422. (84) 
4. GüNTHER, W.: Zur Statik und Kinematik des Cosseratschen Kontinuums. Abh. 
Braunschweig. Wiss. Ges. 10, 195-213. (61, 200, 227) 
5. KANWAL, R. P.: Determination of the vorticity and the gradients of flow parameters behind a three-dimensional unsteady curved shock wave. Arch. Rational 
Mech. Anal. 1, 225-232. (175) 
6. KRZYWOBLOCKI, M. Z. v.: On the stream functions in nonsteady three-dimensional 
flow. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 25, 67. (160) 
7. MARSHAK, R. E.: Effect of radiation on shock wave behavior. Phys. of Fluids 1, 
24-29. (241) 
8. NoLL, W.: A mathematical theory of the mechanical behavior of continuous media. 
Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 2 (1958/59), 197-226. (3, 196, 200, 293, 305) 
9. TouPIN, R. A.: World invariant kinematics. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 1 (1957/58), 
181-211. (152) 
10. TRUESDELL, C.: Geometrie interpretation for the reciprocal deformation tensors. 
Quart. appl. Math. 15, 434-435. (29) 
11. TRUESDELL, C.: Intrinsic equations of spatial gas flow. Math. Res. Center U.S. 
Army, Univ. Wisconsin rep. No. 33, July. Cf. [1960, 5]. (99) 
12. WASHIZU, K.: A note on the conditions of compatibility. J. Math. Phys. 36, 
306-312. (34) 
1959 1. BLANKFIELD, J., and G. C. McVITTIE: Einstein's equations and classical hydrodynamics. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 2 (1958/59), 337-354. (230) 
784 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
BLANKFIELD, J., and G. C. McVITTIE: A method of solution of the equations of 
magnetohydrodynamics. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 2 (1958/59). 411-422. (230) 
CoLEMAN, B. D., and W. NoLL: On the thermostatics of continuous media. Arch. 
Rational Mech. Anal. 4 (1959/60), 97-128. (262) 
DROBOT, S., and A. RYBARSKI: A variational principle of hydromechanics. Arch. 
Rational Mech. Anal. 2 (1958/59), 393-410. (132) 
GRAIFF, F.: Soluzione generate delle equazioni indefinite di equilibrio per una 
membrana. Rend. Lincei (8) 26, 189-196. (229) 
GREEN, A. E., R. S. RIVLIN and A. J. M. SPENCER: The mechanics of non-linear 
materials with memory. Part li. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 3, 82-90. (305) 
GREEN, A. R.: The equilibrium of rods.Arch. Rationa!Mech. Anal. 3, 417-421. (214) 
KRÖNER, E., u. A. SEEGER: Nicht-lineare Elastizitätstheorie der Versetzungen und 
Eigenspannungen. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 3, 97-119. (20, 34) 
NoLL, W.: The foundations of classical mechanics in the light of recent advances 
in continuum mechanics. The Axiomatic Method, with special reference to geometry and physics (1957). Amsterdam: North Holland Co., 266-281. (3, 196, 293) 
ScHAEFER, H.: Die Spannungsfunktionen des dreidimensionalen Kontinuums; 
statische Deutung und Rand werte. lng.-Arch. 28, 291-306. (227) 
TRUESDELL, C. : Invariant and complete stress functions for generat continua. 
Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 4 (1959/60). 1-29. (226) 
ZoLLER, K.: Die Wärmeleitgleichung bei Wärmespannungen. lng.-Arch. 28, 
366-372. (256A) 
1960 JA. CoLEMAN, B., and C. TRuESDELL: On the reciprocal relations of Onsager. J. 
Chem. Phys. forthcoming. (245) 
1. ERICKSEN, J. L.: Anisotropie fluids. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 4 (1959/60), 
231-237- (205, 298) 
2. HAYES, W. D.: Generalized Kelvin's minimum energy theorem. J. Fluid Mech., 
forthcoming. (94) 
3. KRÖNER, E.: Allgemeine Kontinuumstheorie der Versetzungen und Eigenspannungen. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 4 (1959/60). 273-334. (20, 61, 201, 266) 
4. TRUESDELL, C.: The rational mechanics of flexible or elastic bodies, 1638-1788. 
L. Euleri Opera Omnia (2) 11, Part 2. (33A, 66A, 200, 212) 
5. TRUESDELL, C.: lntrinsic equations of spatial gas flow. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 
40, 9-14. (99) 
6. TRUESDELL, C.: Mechanical aspects of diffusion, forthcoming. (295) 
Additional Bibliography K: 
Kinematics of special motions (geometrical theory). 
1872 K 1. DuRRANDE, H.: Proprietes generales du deplacement d'une figure de forme 
variable. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 74, 1243-1247. 
K 2. DuRRANDE, H.: De l'acceleration dans Je deplacement d'un systeme de points 
qui reste homographique a lui-meme. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 75, 1177-1180. 
1873 K 1. DuRRANDE, H.: Essai sur le deplacement d'une figure de forme variable. Ann. 
Ec. Norm. (2) 2, 81-121. 
K 2. GROUARD: Sur le mouvement d'une figure, qui se deplace dans l'espace en 
restaut semblable a elle-meme. Bull. Soc. Philomath. (6) 9, 47-49. Abstract: 
L'lnstitut (2) 1, 163-164. 
1874 K 1. BuRMESTER, L.: Kinematisch-geometrische Untersuchungen der Bewegung ähnlich-veränderlicher ebener Systeme. Z. Math. Phys. 19, 154-169. 
K 2. Bu:RMESTER, L.: Kinematisch-geometrische Untersuchungen der Bewegung affinveränderlicher und collinear-veränderllcher ebener Systeme. Z. Math. Phys. 19, 
465-492. 
K 3. DuRRANDE, H.: Deplacement d'un systeme de points. Proprietes geometriques 
dependant des parametres differentiels du second ordre. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
78, 1036-1040. 
K 4. DuRRANDE, H.: Etude de l'acceleration dans le deplacement d'un systeme de 
forme variable. Ann. Ec. Norm. (2) 3, 151-164. 
1875 K 1. BuRMESTER, L.: Kinematisch-geometrische Untersuchungen der Bewegung gesetzmäßig-veränderlicher Systeme. Z. Math. Phys. 20, 381-422. 
K 2. JORDAN, C.: Sur le mouvement des figures dans le plan et dans l'espace. Bull. 
Soc. Math. France 1,144-148. 
Additional Bibliography K. 785 
K 3. LrGUINE, V.: Sur le lieu des points d'un systeme invariable mobile d'une maniere 
generale dans l'espace, dont les accelerations du premier ordre sont constantes. 
Bull. Soc. Math. France 1, 152-154. 
1877 K 1. MüLLER, R.: Über Selbsthüllcurven und Selbsthüllflächen in ähnlich-veränderlichen Systemen. Z. Math. Phys. 22, 369-376. 
1878 K 1. BuRMESTER, L.: Kinematisch-geometrische Theorie der Bewegung der affinveränderlichen, ähnlich veränderlichen und starren räumlichen oder ebenen 
Systeme. Z. Math. Phys. 23, 108-131. 
K 2. BuRMESTER, L.: Über den Beschleunigungszustand ähnlich-veränderlicher und 
starrer ebener Systeme. Civilingenieur 24. 
1879 K 1. BURMESTER, L.: Über die Festlegung projectiv-veränderlicher ebener Systeme. 
Math. Ann. 14, 472-497. 
K 2. FouRET, G.: Sur le mouvement d'un corps qui se deplace et se deforme en restant 
homothetique a lui-meme. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 88, 227-230. 
K 3. FROMENTI, C.: Movimento delle figure ehe se mantengono simili a se stesse. 
Giorn. math. 17, 232-243. 
K 4. GEISENHEIMER, L.: Untersuchung der Bewegung ähnlich-veränderlicher Systeme. 
Z. Math. Phys. 24, 129-159-
K 5. GEISENHEIMER, L.: Die Bildung affiner Figuren durch ähnlich-veränderliche 
Systeme. Z. Math. Phys. 24, 345-381. 
1880 K 1. BuRMESTER, L.: Über das bifocal-veränderliche System. Math. Ann.16, 89-111. 
1881 K 1. ScHUMANN, A.: Beiträge zur Kinematik ähnlich-veränderlicher und affin-veränderlicher Gebilde. Z. Math. Phys. 26, 157-179-
1883 K 1. MEHMKE, R.: Über die Geschwindigkeiten beliebiger Ordnung eines in seiner 
Ebene bewegten ähnlich-veränderlichen Systems. Civilingenieur (2) 29, 487- 508. 
K 2. MEHMKE, R.: Über den geometrischen Ort der Punkte ohne Normalbeschleunigung in einer Phase eines starren oder affin-veränderlichen Systems. Civilingenieur (2) 29, 581-582. 
K 3. NrcoLI, F.: Intorno ad un caso di movimento di una figura piana ehe si varia 
rimanendo simile a se stessa. Mem. Accad. Modena (2) 1, 59-71. 
K 4. NrcoLI, F.: Intorno ad un caso di movimento di una figura piana ehe si conserva 
simile a se stessa. Mem. Accad. Modena (2) 1, 171-178. 
K 5. NrcoLI, F.: Intorno a due casi di movimento di una figura solida ehe rimane 
simile a se stessa. Mem. Accad. Modena (2) 1, 249-260. 
1885 K 1. SoMOFF, P.: Über die Bewegung ähnlich-veränderlicher ebener Systeme. Z. 
Math. Phys. 30, 193-209. 
1888 K 1. BuRMESTER, L.: Lehrbuch der Kinematik. Leipzig: A. Felix. xx + 942 pp. + 
Atlas. See §§ 329-351. 
1889 K 1. SoMov, P.: Some problems on the distribution of velocityinvariable systems 
[in Russian]. Varshavskia Univ. lzv. 1889, No. 4, 32 pp. 
1890 K 1. MoRLEY, F.: On the kinematics of a triangle of constant shape but varying size 
(with a note). Quart. J. Math. 24, 3 59-369, 386. 
K 2. SoMow, P.: On the acceleration in collinearly variable systems [in Russian]. 
Proceedings of the 8th meeting of Russian Natural Scientists and Physicians, 
St. Petersburg, 1890. Math. and Astron. 41-44. (We have not been able to see 
this reference.) 
1892 K 1. SHEBUEV, G. N.: Application of the theory of quaternions to the mechanics of 
similar and homogeneously variable systems [in Russian]. lzv. Fiz.-Mat. Obsh. 
Kazan (2) 3, 111-160. 
1894 K 1. MANNHEIM, A.: Principes et developpements de geometrie cinematique. Paris: 
Gauthier-Villars. ix + 589pp. See pp. 14-53, 457-475. 
1897 K 1. DE SAUSSURE, R.: Calcul geometrique regle. Amer. J. Math. 19, 329-370. 
1898 K 1. DE SAUSSURE, R.: Cinematique des fluides. Mouvement d'un fluide dans un 
plan. Arch. Sei. Phys. Nat. Geneve (4) 5, 497-519. 
1899 K 1. CAVALLI, E.: Le figure reciproche e la trasformazione quadratica nella cinematica. 
Atti Ace. Napoli (2) 9, No. 12, 29 pp. 
1901 K 1. DE SAussuRE, R.: Sur le mouvement d'une droite qui possede trois degres de 
liberte. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 133, 1283-1285. 
K 2. SEILIGER, D.: On a fundamental theorem in the statics of a variable system 
[in Russian]. Papers Univ. Kazan No. 718, 75-82. (We have not been able to 
see this reference.) 
1902 K 1. BuRMESTER, L.: Kinematisch-geometrische Theorie der Bewegung der affin-veränderlichen, ähnlich-veränderlichen und starren räumlichen oder ebenen Systeme, 
Teil2. Z. Math. Phys. 47, 128-156. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. lll/1. so 
786 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
K 2. CARDINAAL, J.: Over de beweging van veranderlijke stelsels. Amst. Akad. Vers!. 
10, 550-566, 687-691. 
K 3. CARDINAAL, J.: Over de afbeelding van de beweging van veranderlijke stelsels. 
Amst. Akad. Vers!. 11, 466-471. 
K 4. DE SAussuRE, R.: Theorie geometrique du mouvement des corps. Arch. Sei. 
Phys. Nat. Geneve (4) 13, 425-461; 14, 14-41, 209-231; 18, 25-63 (1904); 
21, 36-55, 129-133 (1906). Also issued separately, in parts, Geneva 1902, 
1904, 1906. 
K 5. ScHOENFLIESS, A., u. M. GRüBLER: Kinematik. Enzykl. Math. Wiss. 41, 190-278. 
K 6. SoMOV, P.: On hinged members with variable elements [in Russian]. Varshavskia 
Univ. Izv. 1902, Part 8, No. 3, 45 pp. 
1903 K 1. SoMOFF, P.: Über einige Gelenksysteme mit ähnlich-veränderlichen oder affinveränderlichen Elementen. Z. Math. Phys. 49, 25-61. 
1907 K 1. KoENIGS, G.: Sur !es deformations elastiques qui laissent invariables !es Iangueurs 
d'une triple infinite de lignes droites. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 144, 557-560. 
1910 K 1. KRAUSE, M.: Zur Theorie der ebenen ähnlich veränderlichen Systeme. Jber. 
dtsch. Math.-Ver. 19, 327-339. 
1911 
K 2. MEHMKE, R.: Analytischer Beweis des Satzes von Herrn Reinhold Müller über 
K3. 
K4. 
K5. 
K6. 
K 1. 
K2. 
K3. 
die Erzeugung der Koppelkurve durch ähnlich-veränderliche Systeme. Z. Math. 
Phys. 58, 257-259. 
MüLLER, R.: Erzeugung der Koppelkurve durch ähnlich-veränderliche Systeme. 
Z. Math. Phys. 58, 247-251. 
MüLLER, R.: Über die Momentanbewegung eines ebenen ähnlich-veränderlichen 
Systems in seiner Ebene. Jber. dtsch. Math. Ver. 10, 29-89. 
SKUTSCH, R.: Über die von Herrn Reinhold Müller untersuchte besondere Bewegung eines ähnlich-veränderlichen Systems. Z. Math. Phys. 58, 252-257. 
STUDY, E.: Die Kinematik der Herren de Saussure und Bricard. Jber. dtsch. 
Math.-Ver. 19, 255-263. 
KRAUSE, M.: Zur Theorie der affin veränderlichen ebenen Systeme. Sitzgsber. 
Akad. Wiss. Leipzig 63, 271-288. 
KRAUSE, M.: Über räumliche Bewegungen mit ebenen Bahn kurven. Sitzgsber. 
Akad. Wiss. Leipzig 63, 515-533. 
MEHMKE, R.: Beiträge zur Kinematik starrer und affin-veränderlicher Systeme, 
insonderheit über die Windung der Bahnen der Systempunkte. Z. Math. Phys. 
59, 90-94, 204-220, 440-442. 
1912 K 1. HARTMANN, T.: Zur Theorie der Momentanbewegung eines ebenen ähnlich-veränderlichen Systems. Diss. Rostock, 144 pp. 
1913 K 1. DE DoNDER, T.: Sur divers modes de croissance des milieux continus. Bull. Acad. 
Sei. Belg. 614-621, 642-646. 
K 2. HERRMANN, E.: Über die einförmige Bewegung des ebenen kreisverwandt-veränderlichen Systems. Diss. Tech. Hoch. Dresden, 93 pp. 
1914 K 1. CARL, A.: Zur Theorie der ebenen ähnlich veränderlichen Systeme. Diss. Dresden, 
125 pp. 
K 2. WrNKLER, R.: Über die Bewegung affin-veränderlicher ebener Systeme. Diss. 
Dresden, 73 pp. 
1920 K 1. KRAUSE, M., Assisted by A. CARL: Analysis der ebenen Bewegung. Berlin. 216 pp. 
1922 K 1. DELASsus, E.: Stabilite de l'equilibre sur une Iiaison finie unilaterale. Bull. Sei. 
Math. (2) 46, 283-304. 
K 2. GAMBIER, B.: Mecanismes transformables ou deformables. Couples de surfaces 
qui s'en deduisent. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9) 1, 19-76. 
1932 K 1. ABRAMEsco, N.: Le mouvement d'une figure plane variable qui reste semblable 
a elle-meme. Ann. Sei. Norm. Pisa (2) 1, 155-164. 
K 2. PASCAL, M.: Sul moto di un corpo deformabile ehe si mantiene simile a se stesso. 
I: Formola fondamentale e proprieta ehe se ne deducono. II: Centro istantaneo 
di velocita e conseguenze. Rend. Lincei (6) 15, 871-874; 16, 320-324. 
1933 K 1. ABGHIRIADI, M.: Sur le mouvement d'une figure plane semblablement variable. 
Mathesis 47, Suppl., 14 pp. 
K 2. PASCAL, M.: Sul moto di una figura deformabile piana di area costante e ehe 
rimane affine a se stessa. Rend. Napoli (4) 3, 71-77. 
K 3. PASCAL, M.: Sul moto di una figura deformabile piana ehe si conserva affine 
a se stessa. Rend. Napoli (4) 3, 78-82. 
K 4. PASCAL, M.: Sul centro istantaneo di velocita nulla nel moto di una figura piana 
di area costante e a deformate affine. Rend. Napoli (4) 3, 110-113. 
K 5. PASCAL, M.: Sull'accelerazione nel moto di una figura piana di area costante 
e a deformate affine. Rend. Napoli (4) 3, 123-126. 
Additional Bibliography N. 787 
K 6. PASCAL, M.: Sulla cinematica affine di una figura piana di area costante. Rend. 
Napoli (4) 3, 142-144. 
1934 K 1. Dr Nor, S.: Considerazioni geometriche sul moto di un corpo deformabile ehe si 
mantiene simile a se stesso. Rend. Napoli (4) 3, 176-181. 
K 2. PASCAL, M.: Sul moto di un corpo deformabile di volume costante e ehe rimane 
affine a se stesso. Atti Soc. ital. Progr. Sc. A 222, 194-195. 
1936 K 1. ABRAMESCO, N.: Proprietäti geometrice ale mi~cärii unei figuri plane variabile 
care rämane asemenea cu ea in sä~i, cand trei drepte ale figurii trei prin trei puncte 
fixe, sau cand trei puncte descriu trei drepte fixe. Gaz. Mat. Bucarest 41, 409-414. 
K 2. HARMEGNIES, R.: Sur le mouvement d'une figure plane qui reste homographique 
a elle-meme. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 202, 1323-1324. 
See also the following items from the "List of works cited": DuRRANDE [1871, 4], and 
the papers cited in Sects. 140-142. 
Additional Bibliography N: 
Non-relativistic kinematics and mechanics in generalized spaces. 
1876 N 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Formules fondamentales de cinematique dans !es espaces de courhure constante. Bull. Sei. Math. (1) 11, 233-240. 
1878 N 1. LE:vv, M.: Sur la cinematique des figures continues sur les surfaces courbes, 
et, en general, dans les varietes planes ou courbes. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 86, 
812-818. 
N 2. LE:vv, M.: Sur les conditions que doit remplir un espace pour qu'on y puisse 
deplacer un systeme invariable, a partir de l'une quelconque de ses positions, 
dans une ou plusieurs directions. C. R. Acad. Si., Paris 86, 875-878. 
1881 N 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Sulle equazioni generali dell'elasticitä.. Ann. Mat. (2) 10, 188-211 
(1880-1882) = Opere 3, 383-407. 
1884 N 1. BELTRAMI, E.: Sull'uso delle coordinate curvilinee neUe teorie del potenziale e 
dell'elasticita. Mem. Accad. Sei. Bologna (4) 6, 401-488 = Opere 4, 136-179. 
N 2. HEATH, R. S.: On the dynamics of a rigid body in elliptic space. Phi!. Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Lond. 175, 281-324. 
1885 N 1. KrLLING, W.: Die Mechanik in den nicht-Euklidischen Raumformen. J. reine 
angew. Math. 89, 1-48. 
N 2. HrLL, M. J. M.: On some general equations which include the equations of hydrodynamics ( 1883). Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 14, 1-29. 
1888 N 1. CESARO, E.: Sur une recente communication deM. Levy. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
107, 520-522. 
1889 N 1. PADOVA, E.: La teoria di Maxwell negli spazi curvi. Rend. Lincei (4) 51, 875-880. 
N 2. SoMIGLIANA, C.: Sopra la dilatazione cubica di un corpo elastico isotropo in uno 
spazio di curvatura costante. Ann. Mat. (2) 16, 101-115. 
1890 N 1. PADOVA, E.: I! potenzialedelleforze elastiche di mezzi isotropi. Atti Ist. Veneto 
48 = (7) 1, 445-451. 
1894 N 1. CESARO, E.: Sulle equazioni dell'elasticitä. negli iperspazii. Rend. Lincei (5) 32, 
290-294. 
1900 N 1. DE FRANCESCO, D.: Aleuni problemi di meccanica in uno spazio a tre dimensioni 
di curvatura costante, I and li. Atti Accad. Napoli (2) 10, Nos. 4 (38 pp.) and 
9 (33 pp.). 
N 2. DE FRANCESCO, D.: Sul moto spontaneo di un corpo rigido in uno spazio di curvatura costante. Atti R. Accad. Sei. Torino 35, 34-38, 231-243. 
1901 N 1. BoHLIN, K.: Sur l'extension d'une formule d'Euler et sur le calcul des moments 
d'inertie principaux d'un systeme de points materiels. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
133, 530-532. 
N 2. DE FRANCESCO, D.: Su aleuni problemi di meccanica, in uno spazio pseudosferico, 
analiticamente equivalenti a problemi nello spazio ordinario. Rend. Accad. Napoli 
(3a) 7, 28-38. 
1902 N 1. DE F~ANCEsco, D.: Aleuneformole della meccanica dei fluidi in uno spazio a 
tre dimensioni di curvatura costante, I and li. Atti Accad. Napoli (2) 12, Nos. 9 
(18 pp.) and 10 (13 pp.). 
N 2. STÄCKEL, P.: De ea mecanicae analyticae parte quae ad varietates complurium 
dimensionum spectat. Libellus Ioannis Bolyai ... ad celebrandam memoriam ... 
(Claudiopoli), 63-79. 
1903 N 1. STÄCKEL, P.: Bericht über die Mechanik mehrfacher Mannigfaltigkeiten. Jber. 
dtsch. Math.-Ver. 12, 469-481. 
50* 
788 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPrN: The Classical Field Theories. 
1907 N 1. RrQUIER, CH.: Sur !es systemes d'equations aux derivees partielles auquels conduisent: 1° l'etude des dt\formations finies d'un milieu continu dans l'espace 
a n dimensions; 20 Ia determination des systemes de coordonnees curvilignes 
orthogonales a n variables. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 145, 113 7- 1139. 
1911 N 1. VESSIOT, E.: Sur Ia einematique des milieux continus an dimensions. c. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 152, 1732-1735. 
1912 N 1. DE DoNDER, T.: Sur Ia cinematique des milieux continus. Bull. Acad. Roy. 
Belg. Cl. Sei., 243-251. 
N 2. ZoRAWSKI, K.: Über gewisse Pfaff'sche Systeme, welche bei Bewegungen kontinuierlicher Medien invariant bleiben. Bull. Int. Acad. Sei. Cracovie A 1912, 
436-461. 
1913 N 1. DEL RE, A.: Sulle equazioni generali per Ia dinamica negli spazii ad n dimensioni 
ed a curvatura costante, Ann. Mat. (3) 22, 63-70. 
1926 N 1. SYNGE, J. L.: App!ications of the absolute differential calculus to the theory of 
elastieity (1924). Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 24, 103-108. 
1930 N 1. ToNoLo, A.: Une interpretation physique du tenseur de Riemann et des courbures principales d'une variete V3 • C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 190, 787-788. 
N 2. ToNOLO, A.: Equazioni intrinseche di equilibrio dell' elastieita negli spazi a curvatura costante. Rend. Sem. Mat. Fadova 1, 73-84. 
1931 N 1. ToNOLO, A.: Sistemi isostatiei dei corpi elastici negli spazi a curvatura costante. 
Rend. Sem. Mat. Fadova 2, 152-163. 
1933 N 1. CARTAN, E.: La einematique newtonienne et Ia theorie des espaces reglees a 
connexion euclidienne. Ass. Franc. Avancem. Sei. 19-20. 
N 2. CARTAN, E.: La einematique newtonienne et les espaces a connexion euclidienne. 
Bull. Math. Soc. Roumaine Sei. 35, 69-73. 
N 3. FrNZI, B.: Equazioni intrinseche della meccanica dei sistemi continui perfettamente od imperfettamente flessibili. Ann. Mat. (4) 11, 215-245. 
N 4. TEODORIA, L.: Sur Ia einematique du corps solide dans l'espace euclidien a n 
dimensions. Bull. Math. Soc. Roumaine Sei. 35, 243-247. 
1934 N 1. PASTOR!, M.: Sulle equazioni della meccanica dei mezzi isotropi non euclidei. 
Rend. Lincei (6) 19, 566-572. 
N 2. PASTOR!, M.: Sulla dissipazione di energia nei fluidi viscosi. Rend. Ist. Lombarde 
(2) 67, 823-848. 
193 5 N 1. WESTERGAARD, H. M.: General solution of the problern of elastostatics of an 
n-dimensional homogeneaus isotropic solid in an n-dimensional space. Bull. Amer. 
Math. Soc. 41, 695-699. 
1936 N 1. LaTZE, A.: Die Grundgleichungen der Mechanik im elliptischen Raum. Jber. 
dtsch. Math.-Ver. 46, 51-70. 
1937 N 1. LAMPARIELLO, G.: Varieta sostanziali nel moto di un sistema continuo. Rend. 
Lincei (6a) 15, 383-387. 
1940 N 1. 0RTVAY, R.: The physical implications of some new viewpoints in mathematics 
[in Hungarian]. Mat. Fiz. Lapok 47, 111-138. 
N 2. SKOLEM, T.: A little study on transfinite mechanics [in Norwegian]. Norsk Mat. 
Tidsskr. 22, 5-9. 
1942 N 1. BLASCHKE, W.: Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie und Mechanik. Hamburg. Math. 
Einzelschr. 34. 
1944 N 1. BLASCHKE, W.: Nicht-Euklidische Mechanik. Sitzgsber. Akad. Wiss. Heidelberg 
1943, No. 2, 10 pp. 
1951 N 1. SANTALO, L. A.: On permanent vector-varieties in n dimensions. Portuga!iae 
Math. 10, 125-127. 
N 2. SYNGE, J. L.: On permanent vector-lines in n dimensions. Proc. Amer. Math. 
Soc. 2, 370-372. 
See also the following items from the "List of Works Cited": CLEBSCH [1857, 1; §§ 1-4], 
FADOVA [1889, 7], ZORAWSKI [1900, 12], [1901, 17], ZERMELO [1902, 10], ZORAWSKI [1911, 13 
and 14], DE DONDER [1912, 2], ZORAWSKI [1912, 8]. 
Additional Bibliography P: Principles of Mechanics. 
Any partial bibliography of work on the concepts and axioms of mechanics from the 
origins through the time of LAGRANGE would be misleading. No adequate critical history 
has ever been written. The remarks on this subject given in treatises or general histories of 
physics are often mendacious and usually so incomplete and inaccurate as to be totally 
misinformative. Large extracts from some of the sources, along with helpful comments, 
may be found in: 
Additional Bibliography P: Principles of Mechanics. 789 
JoUGUET, E.: Lectures de mecanique, 2vols. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1908, 1909. X+ 210 
+ 284 pp. 
DuHEM, P.: Le Systeme du Monde, Histoire des doctrines cosmologiques de Platon a Copernic. 
Paris: Hermann. 10 Vols., 1913-1959. 
DuGAS, R.: Histoire de Ia mecanique. Neuchatel: Ed. du Griffon 1950. 649pp. 
DUGAS, R.: La mecanique au xvne-siecle. Neuchatel: Ed. du Griffon 1954. 620 PP· 
CLAGETT, M.: The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages. Madison: Univ. Wisconsin Press 
1959. 711 pp. 
1883 P 1. MAcH, E.: Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung, historisch-kritisch dargestellt. 
Leipzig: Brockhaus. There are many subsequent editions and translations of 
this unreliable work. 
1894 P 1. HERTZ, H.: Die Prinzipien der Mechanik in neuem Zusammenhange dargestellt. 
Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth. xxix + 312 pp. Trans. D. E. JoNES and 
]. T. WALLEY, The principles of mechanics. London: MacMillan & Co. 1899. 
xxviii + 276 PP· 
1897 P 1. BoLTZMANN, L.: Vorlesungen über die Principe der Mechanik I. Leipzig. x + 
241 pp. See§§ 1-12. 
1905 P 1. PAINLEVE, P.: Les axiomes de Ia mecanique et Ie principe de causalite. Bull. 
Soc. frany. Philos. 5, 27-50. See [1922, P1]. 
1906 P 1. FARKAS, ].: Beiträge zu den Grundlagen der analytischen Mechanik. J. reine 
angew. Math. 131, 165-201. 
1909 p 1. PAINLEVE, P.: Les axiomes de la mecanique classique, chapter in La methode 
dans !es sciences. Paris: Alcan. See [ 1922, P 1]. 
1911 P 1. MARCOLONGO, R.: Theoretische Mechanik, 2 vol., Deutsch von H. E. TrMERDING. 
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner 1911 and 1912. 
1922 P 1. PAINLEVE, P.: Les axiomes de Ia mecanique. Examen critique. Note sur Ia 
propagation de Ia Iumiere. Paris: Gauthier-Villars. xvii + 112 pp. (Reprint 
of [1905, P 2], [1909, P 1], and other material.) 
1923 P 1. DIJKSTERHUIS, E. ].: De axioma's der mechanica. Christiaan Huygens 3 
(1923-1924), 87-101. 
1927 P 1. HAMEL, G.: Die Axiome der Mechanik. Handbuch Physik 5, 1-42. 
1928 P 1. DIJKSTERHUIS, E. ].: De historische behandelingswijze van de axiomata der 
mechanica van Newton. Euclides 4, 245-255. 
1934 P 1. ZAREMBA, S.: Sur Ia notion de force en mecanique. Bull. Soc. Math. France 
62, 110-119. 
1936 P 1. LINDSAY, R., B., and H. MARGENAU: Foundations of Physics. New York: J. Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. xiii + 537 pp. 
P 2. PLATRIER, C.: Les Axiomes de la Mecanique Newtonienne. Act. Sei. Indust. No.427. 
Paris: Hermann. 
1937 P 1. BARBILIAN, D.: Eine Axiomatisierung der klassischen Mechanik. C. R. Acad. 
Sei. Roumaine 2, 9-16. 
P 2. PENDSE, C. G.: A note an the definition and determination of mass in Newtonian 
mechanics. Phi!. Mag. (7) 24, 1012-1022. 
1938 P 1. HERMES, H.: Eine Axiomatisierung der allgemeinen Mechanik. Leipzig: Hirzel 48pp. 
P 2. RosSER, B.: Review of the foregoing. J. Symb. Logic 3, 119-120. 
1939 P 1. KRATZER, A.: Betrachtungen zu den Grundlagen der Mechanik. Semester-Ber. 
Math. Sem. Münster 14, 1-15. 
P 2. PENDSE, C. G.: A further note an the definition and determination of mass in 
Newtonian mechanics. Phi!. Mag. (7) 27, 51-61. 
P 3. NARLIKAR, V. V.: The concept and determination of mass in Newtonian mechanics. 
Phi!. Mag. (7) 27, 33-36. 
1940 P 1. PENDSE, C. G.: Onmassandforcein Newtonianmechanics. Phi!. Mag. 29,477-484. 
P 2. ZAREMBA, S.: Reflexions sur !es fondaments de Ia mecanique rationnelle. Enseignement Math. 38, 59-69. 
1943 P 1. BRELOT, M.: Sur !es principes mathematique de Ia mecanique classique. Ann. 
Univ. Grenoble (sect. sci.-med.) 18, 24 pp. 
1944 p 1. BRELOT, M.: Sur quelques points de mecanique rationnelle. Ann. Univ. Grenoble 
(sect. sci.-med.) 20, 37 pp. 
1947 P 1. SIMON, H. A.: Axioms of Newtonian mechanics. Phi!. Mag. (7) 36, 888-905. 
1949 P 1. HAMEL, G.: Theoretische Mechanik. Berlin-Göttingen-Heidelberg: Springer. xvi 
+ 796 pp. See Kap. 1. 
1950 P 1. BANACH, S.: Mechanika w zakresie szk61 akademickich. Krakow, Monogr. Mat. 
t. 8-9, 3rd ed., ix + 555 pp. Trans. E. ]. ScoTT, Mechanics, Warsaw 1951. 
iv + 546 pp. See Chap. III, §§ 1-4. 
790 C. TRUESDELL and R. TOUPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
1953 P 1. McKINSEY, J. C. C., A. C. SuGAR and P. SuPPEs: Axiomatic foundations of classical 
particle mechanics. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 253-272. 
P 2. McKINSEY, J. C. C., and P. SuPPEs: Transformations of systems of classical 
particle mechanics. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 273-289. 
19 54 P 1. BRELOT, M.: Les Principes Mathematiques de la Mecanique Classique. Grenoble 
and Paris. 
P 2. PLATRIER, C.: Mecanique Rationelle 1. Paris: Dunod. See pp. 77-180. 
See also the following items from the "List of works Cited": KIRCHHOFF [1876, 2; Vor!. 1, 
§§ 1-2, 4, 7], WHITTAKER [1904, 8; Ch.IIJ, }AUMANN [1905, 2], HAMEL [1908, 4], 
NoLL [1957, 11], [1958, 8], [1959, 9]. 
Additional Bibliography R: Relativistic Continuum Theories 
1904 R 1. 
1909 R 1. 
R 2. 
R 3. 
R 4. 
1911 R 1. 
R 2. 
R 3. 
R 4. 
R 5. 
R 6. 
R 7. 
1912 R1. 
R2. 
1914 R 1. 
1915 R 1. 
R 2. 
R3. 
1916 R 1. 
1917 R 1. 
1918 R1. 
R 2. 
1922 R 1. 
1923 R 1. 
R 2. 
ABRAHAM, M.: Zur Theorie der Strahlung und des Strahlungsdruckes. Ann. d. 
Phys. 14, 236-287. 
ABRAHAM, M.: Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper. Rend. Pa!. 28, 1-28. 
BoRN, M.: Die Theorie des starren Elektrons in der Kinematik des Relativitätsprinzips. Ann. d. Phys. 30, 1- 56. 
HERGLOTZ, G.: Über den vom Standpunkt des Relativitätsprinzips aus als "Starr" 
zu bezeichnenden Körper. Ann. d. Phys. 31, 393-415. 
NoETHER, F.: Zur Kinematik des starren Körpers in der Relativtheorie. Ann. 
d. Phys. 31, 919-944. 
BORN, M.: Elastizitästheorie und Relativitätstheorie. Phys. Z. 12, 569-57 5. 
HERGLOTZ, G.: Über die Mechanik des deformierbaren Körpers vom Standpunkte 
der Relativitätstheorie. Ann. Phys. (4) 36, 493-533. 
lGNATOWSKY, W. v.: Zur Elastizitätstheorie vom Standpunkte des Relativitätsprinzips. Phys. Z. 12, 164- 169. 
lGNATOWSKY, W. v.: Zur Hydrodynamik vom Standpunkte des Relativitätsprinzips. Phys. Z. 12, 441-442. 
JüTTNER, F.: Die Dynamik eines bewegten Gases in der Relativitätstheorie. 
Ann. Phys. (4) 35, 145-161. 
LAuE, M. v.: Zur Dynamik der Relativitätstheorie. Ann. Phys. (4) 35, 524-542. 
NoRDSTRÖM, G.: Zur Relativitätsmechanik deformierbarer Körper. Phys. Z. 12, 
854-857. 
LAMLA, E.: Über die Hydrodynamik des Relativitätsprinzips. Ann. Phys. (4) 
37, 772-796. 
LEMERAY, E. M.: Elasticite longitudinale et elasticite transversale. Soc. Fran~. 
Phys. No. 29, 2. 
MATTIOLI, G. D.: La dinamica di relativita dei mezzi continui dedotta della 
dinamica classica colla modificazione di un solo principio. Rend. Lincei (5) 232 , 
427-432. 
DANIELL, P. J.: Rotation of eiastic bodies and the principle of relativity. Phi!. 
Mag. (6) 30, 7 54-761. 
EINSTEIN, A.: Der Energiesatz in der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Sitzgsber. 
preuß. Akad. Wiss. 1915, 778-786. 
MATTIOLI, G. D.: La dinamica di relativita dei mezzi continui dedotta della 
dinamica classica colla modificazione di un solo principio. Nuovo Cim. (6) 9, 
263-270. 
EINSTEIN, A.: Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Ann. d. Phys. 
49, 769-822. 
NoRDSTRÖM, G.: Die Mechanik der Continua in der Gravitationstheorie von 
Einstein. Handel. Nederl. Natuuren Geneesk. Congr. 16, 176-178. 
EINSTEIN, A.: Über Gravitationswellen. Sitzgsber. preuss. Akad. Wiss. 1918, 
154-167. 
THIRRING, H.: Über die Wirkung rotierender ferner Massen in den Einsteinsehen 
Gravitationstheorie. Phys. Z. 19, 33-39. 
BAcH, R.: Neue Lösungen der Einsteinsehen Gravitationsgleichungen. A. Das 
Feld in der Umgebung eines langsam rotierenden kugelähnlichen Körpers von 
beliebiger Masse in 1. und 2. Annäherung. Math. Z. 13, 119-133. 
CARTAN, E.: Sur !es varietes a connexion affine et la theorie de la relativite generalisee. Ann. Ec. Norm. (3) 40, 325-412; 41, 1-25 (1924); 42, 17-88 (1925). 
GORDON, W.: Zur Lichtfortpflanzung nach der Relativitätstheorie. Ann. d. Phys. 
72, 421-456. 
R 3. 
1924 R 1. 
1926 R 1. 
1928 R 1. 
R 2. 
1931 R 1. 
R 2. 
1932 R 1. 
R 2. 
1933 R 1. 
R 2. 
1934 R 1. 
R 2. 
1937 R 1. 
1939 R1. 
R 2. 
R 3. 
R 4. 
R 5. 
1940 R 1. 
R 2. 
R3. 
R 4. 
R 5. 
1941 R 1. 
R 2. 
R 3. 
1942 R 1. 
1944 R 1. 
R 2. 
R 3. 
1945 R 1. 
R 2. 
Additional Bibliography R: Relativistic Continuum Theories. 791 
MARCOLONGO, R.: Relativita, 2a edizione riveduta ed ampliata. Messina: G. Principato. ix + 235 pp., esp. p. 117. 
EISENHART, L. P.: Space-time continua of perfect fluids in generat relativity. 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 26, 205-220. 
MEKSYN, D.: On equilibrium and motion of a continuous medium in four-dimensional space. Phi!. Mag. (7) 2, 994-1006. 
GHOSH, J.: On the gravitational field of an ideal fluid. Bull. Calcutta Math. 
Soc. 19, 67-82. 
LEVI-CIVITA, T.: Fondamenti di meccanica relativistica. Bologna: Zanichelli. 
vii + 185 pp., esp. p. 70. 
AKELEY, E. S.: The rotating fluid in the relativity theory. Phi!. Mag. (7) 11, 
330-344. 
AKELEY, E. S.: The rotating fluid in the relativity theory. Phys. Rev. (2) 37, 
109-110. 
DE DoNDER, TH., et Y. DuPoNT: Theorie relativiste de l'elasticite et de l'electromagnetostriction. Bull. Sei. Acad. Belg. (5) 18, 680-691, 782-790, 899-910; 
19, 370-378 (1933). 
FINZI, B.: Meccanica relativistica ereditaria. Atti Soc. Ital. Progr. Sc. 20, 8-11. 
TOLMAN, R. C.: Thermodynamics and relativity. Science (2) 77, 291-298, 
313-317. 
ToLMAN, R. C., and H. P. RoBERTSON: On the interpretation of heat in relativistic 
thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. 43, 564-568. 
SYNGE, J. L.: The energy-tensor of a continuous medium. Trans. Roy. Soc. 
Canada (3) 28, 127-171. 
ToLMAN, R. C.: Relativity, thermodynamics and cosmology. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. xv + 502 PP· 
SYNGE, J. L.: Relativistic hydrodynamics. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 43, 376-416. 
TAMM, J.: Cerenkov radiation and symmetry of the stress tensor. J. Phys. USSR. 
1, 439-
VAN DANTZIG, D.: Stresstensor and particle density in special relativity. Nature, 
Lond. 143, 855-
VAN DANTZIG, D.: On the phenomenological thermodynamics of moving matter. 
Physica, Haag 6, 673-704. 
VAN DANTZIG, D.: On relativistic thermodynamics. Proc. Kon. Nederl. Akad. 
Wetensch. 42, 601-607 = lndagat. Math. 1, 212-218. 
VAN DANTZIG, D.: On relativistic gas theory. Proc. Kon. N ederl. Akad. \Vetensch. 
42, 608-625 = lndagat. Math. 1, 219-236. 
EcKART, C.: The thermodynamics of irreversible processes, III. Relativistic theory 
of the simple fluid. Phys. Rev. (2) 58, 919-924. 
HAANTJES, J.: Die Gleichberechtigung gleichförmig beschleunigter Beobachter 
für die electromagnetischen Erscheinungen. Proc. Kon. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. 
43, 1288-1299. 
LrcHNERowrcz, A.: Sur un theoreme d'hydrodynamique relativiste. C. R. Acarl. 
Sei., Paris 211, 11 7- 119. 
ROSENFELD, L.: Sur le tenseur a impulsion-energie. Aead. Roy. Belg .. Cl. Sei. 
Mem. Coll. 18, fase. 6, 30 pp. 
VAN DANTZIG, D.: On the thermodynamics of perfeetly perfect fluids. Kon. 
Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. 43, 387-401, 609-618. 
BERGMANN, P. G.: On relativistic thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. (2) 59, 928. 
LICHNEROWICZ, A.: Sur des theoremes d'unicite relatifs aux equations gravitationnelles du cas interieur. Bull. Sei. Math. (2) 65, 54-72. 
LICHNEROWICZ, A.: Sur !'invariant integral de l'hydrodynamique re!ativiste. 
Ann. Ee. Norm. (3) 58, 285-304. 
BERENDA, C. W.: The problern of the rotating disk. Phys. Rev. 62, 280-290. 
CosTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: La Relativite Restreinte et Ia Premiere J\'lecanique 
Broglienne. Paris: Gauthier-Villars. 71 pp. 
COSTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Sur les equations fondamentales, classiques, puis 
relativistes, de la dynamique des milieux continus. J. Math. Pures Appl. 23, 
211-217. 
EINSTEIN, A., and V. BARGMANN: Bivector fields, I and I I. Ann. Math. 45, 
1-14, 15-23. 
CosTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Definition covariante de la force. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 221, 743-747. 
MAUTNER, F., and E. ScHRÖDINGER: Infinitesimal affine connection with twofold Einstein-Bargmann symmetry. Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 50, 223-231. 
792 C. TRUESDELL and R. TouPIN: The Classical Field Theories. 
R 3. ScHRÖDINGER, E.: On distant affine connection. Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 50, 
143-154. 
1946 R 1. CosTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Sur la conservation de la masse propre. Sur la notion 
de fluide parfait. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 222, 271-273. 
R 2. CosTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Equations generales de l'hydrodynamique des fluides 
parfaits. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 222, 369-371. 
R 3. COSTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Sur la theorie des forces elastiques. c. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 222, 477-479· 
R 4. COSTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Sur la thermodynamique des fluides. C. R. Acad. 
Sei., Paris 22:Z: 590-592. 
R 5. CoSTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Retour sur la dynamique et la thermodynamique 
des milieux continus. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 222, 1472-1474. 
R 6. CosTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: Dynamique relativiste des milieux continus. La 
variation de la masse propre en fonction du travail des forces superficielles. J. 
Math. Pures Appl. 25, 187-207. 
1947 R 1. DE WET, J. S.: Symmetrie energy-momentum tensors in relativistic field theories. 
Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 43, 511-520. 
R 2. HILL, E. L.: On the kinematics of uniformly accelerated motions and classical 
electromagnetic theory. Phys. Rev. 72, 143-149. 
R 3. RosEN, N.: Notes on rotation and rigid bodies in relativity theory. Phys. Rev. 
71, 54. 
R 4. WEYSSENHOFF, J ., and A. RoABE: Relativistic dynamics of spin fluids and spin 
particles. Acta phys. Polonica 9, 7-18. 
1948 R 1. TAUB, A. H.: Relativistic Rankine-Hugoniot equations. Phys. Rev. (2) 74, 
328-334. 
1949 R 1. CLARK, G. L.: The mechanics of continuous matter in relativity theory. Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, Sect. A 62, 434-441. 
R 2. CosTA DE BEAUREGARD, 0.: La Theorie de la Relativite Restreinte. Paris: Masson 
& Cie. vi + 173 pp. 
R 3. FoKKER, A. D.: On the space-time geometry of a moving rigid body. Rev. Mod. 
Phys. 21, 406-408. 
R 4. PAPAPETROU, A.: Non-symmetrie stress-energy-momentum tensor and spin 
density. Phil. Mag. 40, 937-946. 
1950 R 1. BLOCH, C.: Variational principle and conservation equations in non-local field 
theory. Kgl. danske Vidensk. Selsk., mat.-fys. Medd. 26, 30 pp. 
R 2. CLARK, G. L.: The extemal gravitational and electromagnetic fields of rotating 
bodies. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., Ser. A 201, 488-509. 
R 3. DE HoFFMAN, F., and E. TELLER: Magneto-hydrodynamic shocks. Phys. Rev. 
(2) 80, 692-702. 
R 4. RoBERTSON, H. P.: The geometries of the thermal and gravitational fields. Amer. 
Math. Monthly 51, 232-245. 
1951 R 1. HILL, E. L.: The deformation of moving coordinate systems in relativistic theories. 
Phys. Rev. 84, 1165-1168. 
R 2. LEAF, B.: The continuum in special relativity theory. Phys. Rev. 84, 345-350. 
1952 R 1. GETHING, P. J. D.: Rotation and magnetism in the world-models of kinematic 
relativity. Monthly Notices Roy. Astronom. Soc. London 112, 578-582. 
R 2. MöLLER, C.: The Theory of Relativity. Oxford. 
R 3. TAKENO, H.: On relativistic theory of rotating disk. Progr. Theor. Phys. Japan 
7, 367-376. 
R 4. UENO, Y., and H. TAKENO: On equivalent observers. Prog. Theor. Phys. Japan 
8, 291-301. 
R 5. WHITROW, G. J.: The Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction phenomenon and theories 
of the relativity of Galilean frames. Sei. Proc. Roy. Dublin Soc. 26, 37-44. 
1953 R 1. G"il'RSEY, F.: Gravitation and cosmic expansion in conformal space-time. Proc. 
Cambridge Phil. Soc. 49, 285-291. 
R 2. KIRKWOOD, R. L.: The physical basis of gravitation. Phys. Rev. 92, 1557-1562. 
R 3. MATRAI, T.: A relativistic treatment of rigid motions. Nature, Land. 172, 
858-859. 
R 4. STEPHENSON, G., and C. W. KILMISTER: A unified theory of gravitation and 
electromagnetism. Nuovo Cim. 10, 230-235. 
R 5. TAYLOR, N. W.: The relativistic electromagnetic equations in a material medium. 
Austral. J. Phys. 6, 1-9. 
R 6. UENO, Y : On the wave theory of light in general relativity. Progr. ·Theor. Phys. 
Japan 10, 442-450. 
Additional Bibliography R: Relativistic Continuum Theories. 793 
1954 R 1. GoMES, R. L.: The motion of rigid body in restricted relativity. Gaz. Mat. Lisboa 
15, No. 58, 9-11. 
R 2. KrLMISTER, C. W., and G. STEPHENSON: An axiomatic criticism of unified field 
theories, I and II. Nuovo Cim. 11, Suppl. 91-105. 118-140. 
R 3. KrRKWOOD, R. L.: Gravitational field equations. Phys. Rev. 95, 1051-1056. 
R 4. POUNDER, J. R.: On relativistic rigid surfaces of revolution. Comm. Dublin Inst. 
Adv. Study, Ser. A, No. 11, 53 pp. 
R 5. SALZMAN, G., and A. H. TAUB: Born-typerigidmotion in relativity. Phys. Rev. 
(6) 95, 1659-1669. 
R 6. ScHRÖDINGER, E.: On distant affine connection. Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 50, 
143-154. 
R 7. SYNGE, J. L. :Relativistically rigid surfaces, Studies in mathematics and mechanics 
presented to Richard von Mises, pp. 217-226. NewYork: Academic Press. 
R 8. TAUB, A. H.: General relativistic variational principle for perfect fluids. Phys. 
Rev. 94, 1468-1470. 
1955 R 1. BoLAZS, N. L.: The propagation of light rays in moving media. J. Opt. Soc. Amer. 
45, 63-64. 
R 2. FrNKELSTEIN, D.: Interna! structure of spinning particles. Phys. Rev. 100, 
924-931. 
R 3. KREMPASKY, J.: The strain tensor in space-time as a result of motion. Mat. 
Fyz. Casopis Slovensk. Akad. 5, 124-131. 
R 4. LrcHNERowrcz, A.: Theories Relativistes de la Gravitation et de l'Electromagnetisme. Paris: Masson & Cie. 
R 5. MARX, G., u. G. GYÖRGYr: Über den Energie-Impuls-Tensor des elektromagnetischen Feldes in Dielektrika. Ann. Phys. (6) 16, 241-256. 
1956 R 1. GoMES, R. L.: Kinematics of rigid bodies in relativity. Gaz. Fis. Lisboa 3, 99-107. 
R 2. ScHILD, A.: On gravitational theories of Whitehead's type. Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond., Ser. A 235, 202-209. 
R 3. ScHNUTZER, E.: Zur relativistischen Elektrodynamik in beliebigen Medien. Ann. 
Phys. (6) 18, 171-180. 
R 4. SYNGE, J. L.: Relativity: The Special Theory. Amsterdam: North Holland 
Publishing Co.; New York: Interscience Publ. 
R 5. TAUB, A. H.: Isentropic hydrodynamics in plane symmetric space-times. Phys. 
Rev. (2) 103, 454-467. 
R 6. WrNOGRADSKI, J.: Sur Je tenseur impulsion-energie metrique et Je theoreme de 
Noether. Cahiers de Phys. 67, 1-5. 
19 57 R 1. ARNOWITT, R. L.: Phenomenological approach to a unified field theory. Phys. 
Rev. 105, 735-742. 
R 2. MARX, G.: Innere Arbeit in der relativistischen Dynamik. Acta phys. Acad. Sei. 
Hungar. 6, 353-379. 
R 3. SYNGE, J. L.: The Relativistic Gas. Amsterdam. 
R 4. TAUB, A. H.: Singular hypersurfaces in general relativity. Illinois J. Math. 
1, 370-388. 
1959 R 1. SYNGE, J. L.: A theory of elasticity in general relativity. Math. Z. 12, 82-87. 
R 2. TAUB, A. H.: On circulation in relativistic hydrodynamics. Arch. Rational Mech. 
Anal. 3, 312-324. 
Appendix. 
Tensor Fields. 
By 
J. L. ERICKSEN. 
With 2 Figures. 
I. Preliminaries. 
1. The nature of this appendix. This appendix is a heterogeneaus collection of results 
on tensor fields. The reader is assumed familiar with the elements of vector and tensor 
analysis and of matrix algebra. The author is indebted to Drs. W. NoLL, R.A. TouPIN, 
C. TRUESDELL and M. K. ZoLLER for bringing to his attention many references and helping 
to correct many errors. Such defects as remain are of course the responsibility of the author. 
a) Notation. 
2. Tensor notation. We employ the methods and notation of the tensor 
calculus and, to a lesser extent, matrix algebra and GIBBS' vector analysis. Until 
further notice, write xl, x2, ••• , x" for the co-ordinates of pointsinan n-dimensional 
space. For abbreviation, we let a: stand forthisset of Co-ordinates. Until further 
notice, italic lower case letters other than x will be used for the kernel indices 
and tensor indices of tensors. Also, for a given set of tensor components a"···"'p ... q 
we write a; for "the components a"···"'p ... q of the tensor a" or "the tensor having 
the components a"···"'p ... q"• we write "the tensor a"--·"'p ... q"• or, more often, "the 
tensor a ". W e employ the summation convention for diagonally repeated tensorial 
indices and indices of Christofiel symbols. The notation a:::;" denotes the covariant 
derivative, except when otherwise noted. 
A square bracket enclosing m running indices indicates that the tensor is 
completely antisymmetrized with respect to these indices. This is done by 
permuting the indices in all possible ways, attaching a positive (negative) sign 
to the tensors corresponding to even (odd) permutations, adding these tensors 
and dividing by m!. Parentheses inclosing m running indices indicate that the 
tensor is completely symmetrized with respect to the enclosed indices. This is 
done in the same way except that the positive sign is attached to all permutations. 
For example 
W e use the short notation 
\ IX\ = 8 (xl, x2, ... , x") 
a:, - o(X1,X2, ••• ,Xn) 
(2.1) 
(2.2) 
when the x" are given in terms of parameters XK by a mapping a:= a: (X), whether 
this be regarded as a co-ordinate transformation or as a point transformation. 
Unless greater or lesser generality is asserted explicitly or is evident from the 
context, the space considered in this treatise is Euclidean 3-space with real 
Sect. 3. Matrix and vector notations. 795 
co-ordinates. The components of associated tensors are regarded as different 
sets of components of the same tensor; the same kernelleHer is used for all these 
components, and the context will make clear whether a stands for a particular 
set of components or is intended as a general symbol for all components. In 
particular, weshall often write 1 for the metric tensor gkm• its mixed components 
ö!:,, and its inverse gkm_ 
Setting g == det gk m and assuming g > 0, we use the notations 
(2.3) 
where n is the dimension of the space and the s's are the usual permutation symbols, with sl...n = sl. .. n = 1 in all co-ordinate systems. The e's are examples of 
axial tensors, which transform as absolute tensors under co-ordinate transformations with positive J acobian, and und er those only. 
In Euclidean space, a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system is available. 
If we write z or z1, z2, ••• , zn for the co-ordinates of points, this in itself indicates 
that we are using reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, and at the sametime we follow 
the notation and the summation convention of Cartesian tensors, writing all tensor 
indices as subscripts and summing on repeated indices. 
Moreover, for the position vector from a fixed point to x, we write pk or pk 
or p. If the fixed point has reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates 0z, then p is the 
vector whose covariant and contravariant components reduce to z- 0z in reetangular Cartesian systems. If 0z = 0, then in reetangular Cartesian systems 
and only in such systems we have x =p =Z. Formulae in which p occur should 
be invariant when 0z is replaced by a different fixed point 0z*; in most cases, 
verification of this invariance is left to the reader. In general co-ordinates, 
p and x are entirely different quantities. For the vector element of arc we write 
dx in general Co-ordinates, dz in formulae whose validity is limited to reetangular 
Cartesian co-ordinates. Curvilinear components of p at x generally differ from 
those at the fixed point. Except where otherwise noted, we use the former. 
3. Matrix and vector notations. For second order tensors, we sometimes use 
matrix or dyadic notation1. For example, we write c =a · b for the equation 
c!:, = a~ b!;.; a-1 for the tensor, if it exists, which is related to a by a · a-1 =1, 
the components of a-1 being a;;;lk; while a' denotes the transpose of a, given by 
a~m =amk· 
More generally, the single dot operation is defined by the equations a · b == t 
and b · a = u, where the tensors t and u are given by 
(3.1) 
In three-dimensional spaces, also the single cross operation of GIBBS 2 may 
be defined. If a is any vector, b any tensor, then a X b == c and b X a == d, where 
the tensors c and d are given by 
(3.2) 
The cross or vector tx of a second order tensor t is the axial vector given by 
tk = ekrs t = ekrs t x rs [rs]· (3 ·3) 
Thus apart from algebraic sign, the contravariant components of tx are the components of 2 Vg t[rs]• not of Vg t[rs]• andin particular (grad b)x =curl b. Since a 
1 Alternatively, our direct notation may be interpreted in terms of linear transformations. 
Cf. e.g. HALMOS [1942, 1, Chap. II], and, for applications to kinematics and mechanics, 
NoLL [1955. J]. 
2 [1881, J], [1884, J], [1909, 1]. 
796 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sects. 4, 5. 
skew-symmetric !ensor of second order in a three-dimensional space has at most 
three independent components, in any equation where it appears it may be 
replaced by its cross. When both t and u are skew-symmetric, 
(3.4) 
We introduce the symbol '*'· which may be read "trident", to stand for a 
scalar, vector, or tensor of any order, so long as the formulae in which it appears 
have a sense. By grad '*'· div W, and curl W we mean the tensors a, b, and c 
given by 
a,. ........ = w ........ ,k. b"·""'= '*''""· ... ,,. or c:. ..... =e"" w............ (3.5) 
where the last applies only in the three-dimensional case. These definitions are 
so framed that the identities div curl W = 0 curl grad W = 0, familiar when W 
is a vector, hold for a tensor of any order. 
For positive integral K, the K-th power lJCK) of a vector bis the tensor b"'• .. . b mk, 
The definition is extended to all integral K and put in inductive form as follows: 
lJH)= 0, lJ(O) 1, lJ(K+l) = b(K) b. (J.6) 
We denote by {bCKl '*'} the expression1 
{b(K) W} = b(K) '*' + b(K-l) Wb+ ... + Wb(K). (3.7) 
4. Projections. If n is a unit vector, we define the normal projection Wn and 
the tangential profection W1 of w onto the direction of n by 
(4.1) 
the latter formula being restricted to three-dimensional space. When W = c, 
a vector, we write Cn rather than Cn for the normal projection. 
Again in 3-space, consider the special Co-ordinate transformations which leave x1 fixed: 
zU= x1, x•« = x•« (x2, zll), and write 1g= det g .. p. where cx, ß have the range 2, 3. Then, 
considering only those co-ordinate systems such that 1g > 0, we see that the quantities 1t 
defined by 
(4.2) 
where t is a three-dimensional tensor, transform as components of a tensor 2 an the surface 
x1 = const. The two-dimensional tensor 1t may be called the skew projection of t onto the 
x1-direction. Taking the trace of Eq. (4.2) yields a relation3 between the components of tx 
and the traces of the three skew projections kt: 
t; = (gfkg)! k t~. (4. 3) 
b) Use of complex co-ordinates. 
5. Use of tensor methods in complex co-ordinates. The formalism of the 
tensor calculus applies to complex as well as real co-ordinate transformations; 
for problems in the Euclidean plane, complex Co-ordinates are sometimes convenient. Suppose, for example, that we introduce complex co-ordinates x1 = 
z1 +iz2 , x2 =XI, where the z,. arereetangular Cartesian and the superposed bar 
denotes the complex conjugate. The usual formulae of tensor transformation 
1 TRUESDELL [1949, 3], [1951, 2], [1951, 3], [1954, 2, Chap. I]. 
2 This result and Eq. (4.2) are due in principle to CAUCHY [1841, 1, Th. VIII]. Cf. TRUESDELL [1954, 6, § 2]. 
3 When both tx and ,.e are referred to physical components (Sect. 13) in an orthogonal 
co-ordinate system, the factor (gf1g)! disappears from Eq. (4.3). 
Sects. 6, 7- Preliminary definitions. 797 
yield the covariant components t""' (x) in terms of the Cartesian components t".,.: 
4tu (x) = 4t22 (x) =tu-t2 2- i (t12 + t21), } 
4t12 (x) =4t21 (x) =tu +t22 +i(t12 -t21). (5.1) 
For the special case1 when t is the metric tensor, this yields gu(x) =g22 (x) =0, 
g12 (x) = g21 (x) = ! ; hence g11 (x) = g2 2 (x) = 0, g12 (x) = g21 (x) = 2. All results 
which do not depend essentially on conditions of reality carry over to complex 
co-ordinates. As is clear from the above example, the inequalities gu > 0, 
gug22 -g~ >0 which, in real co-ordinates, express the fact that the g""' are 
coefficients of a real, positive definite quadratic fom1, do not. Since we occasionally 
use such conditions, our treatment is restricted to real co-ordinates except where 
otherwise noted. 
6. Complex representation of plane second order Cartesian tensors. Retuming 
to the example (5.1), we note that a rotation of the co-ordinates z" induces on x" 
the transformation xu = xu = x1 e•'P, where cp is the angle of rotation, and that 
the tensor t11 .,. (x) transforms according to the simple laws 
t12 (x*) = t21 (x*) = t12 (x) = t21 (x), fu (x*) = t22 (x*) = t11 (x) e-2i'P. (6.1) 
In linear elasticity, t, interpreted as the stress tensor, satifies the equilibrium equations 
and compatibility conditions for generalized plane stress if and only if 2 
112 (:r) = t21 (:r) = tZ = I + J. 111 (:r) = g - x2 /', (6.2) 
where I and g are arbitrary functions of the complex variable x1• Similar results hold for 
plane strain. In this context, Iu (:r) is sometimes called the conjugate stress deviator to indicate 
that it is unaltered if t is replaced by t + K 1, where K is any scalar and 1 is the two-dimensional 
unit matrix. Comparison of these results with their Cartesian analogues shows the simplicity 
that can result from using complex co-ordinates. In both applications all three Cartesian 
components of t may be calculated easily from the two complex components 112 (:r) and 
Iu (:r), the former of which may be regarded as a scalar. It follows easily from Eq. (5.1) 
that 112 (:r) = 0 if and only if I is symmetric and traceless, and that in the symmetric case 
111 (:r) = 0 if and only if t = K 1, where K is a scalar. 
When t is symmetric, by Eq. (5.1) 2 we see that t12 (x) is always real. As will 
be shown in Sect. 48, there exists a real rotation that renders t diagonal. Letting 
x* =zi +izi, from Eq. (5.1) we see that tu(x*) is real. By Eq. (6.1) we get 
t11 (x) =fu(x*) i'~', and hence Eq. (5.1) yields 3 
2112 tan2cp= ----. 
111-122 
II. Dimensionsand physical components. 
a) Dimensionsofatensor and its components. 
(6.3) 
7. Preliminary definitions. Among the transformations to which quantities 
occurring in physics are subject are those of dimensional units 4. In constructing 
a system of measurement, in principle one must introduce a unit of measurement 
for each type of physical quantity to be considered. It is customary to lay down 
a finite set of units U0 ( a = 1, ... , n) as fundamental units, and to require that 
1 For other examples, cf. GREEN and ZERNA [1954, 1]. 
2 MusKHELISHVILI [1953, 1, Chap. 5] gives a rigorous derivation of these results, which 
he attributes to KoLOsov [ 1909, 4]. 
3 MAXWELL [1870, 3, PP· 194-195]. 4 Dimensional analysis remains a controversial and somewhat obscure subject. We 
do not attempt a complete presentation here. 
798 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 8. 
every unit be expressible in terms of them in the symbolic form Uf' ... U~n, where 
the K's arereal exponents. A fundamental unit may be regarded as a measure 
of a definite type of entity, such as length or time, the "size" of the unit being 
assigned arbitrarily. To compensate for this arbitrariness, we regard any other 
system of units, obtainable from the given set by changing the size of the fundamental units independently, as equivalent or indistinguishable. More precisely, 
we require physical equations to be invariant under the transformations 
(7.1) 
hereafter called dimensional transformations, the ua being arbitrarily chosen real 
numbers. A function Q (U) of the units Ul, ... , Un is called a measure number 
having the dimension [Uf' ... U~n] provided that it transforms under Eq. (7.1) 
according to the law Q (U*) = Q (U) Uf' ... U~n. The appropriate units for Q are 
Uf' ... U~n, in accordance with the usual notion that the product of a measure 
nurober by its units is unaffected by dimensional transformations. We write [1] 
for [U~ ... un 
Fora given group Gof Co-ordinate transformations, a set of functionstZ:::~(;r, U) 
are said to be the components, relative to the co-ordinates xk and units Ua, of a 
tensor of weight w having the dimension [Uf' ... U~n] provided that, under Eq. (7.1) 
and an arbitrary co-ordinate transformation x*k = x*k (x) of G, these functions 
transform according to the law 
(7.2) 
With a fixed choice of co-ordinates, each component of t is clearly a measure 
nurober having the dimension [Uf' ... U~n]. Statements to the effect that physical equations are "in their simplest form" generally mean only that they reduce 
to equations relating such tensors. 
8. Physical dimensions of tensors. In classical mechanics, it is customary to 
take G to be the orthogonal group1, to require one of the fundamental units 
to be a unit L of length, and to assume that the co-ordinate differentials dzk 
transform as a Cartesian vector having the dimension [LJ, in agreement with 
the notion that ds2 = dzk dzk is an absolute scalar having the dimension [L2]. 
Using physicallaws and other devices, one determines the appropriate Cartesian 
tensor law to represent the entities to be considered. The dimensions so assigned 
in reetangular Cartesian systems we call physical dimensions to distinguish them 
from other dimensionstobe introduced below. From this point of view the Cartesian metric tensor bkm can consistently be regarded as a dimensionless tensor, 
by which is meant a tensor having the physical dimension [1]. 
In passing to orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinates, one assigns a dimension 
to each variable introduced as a co-ordinate 2• The common procedure is to use 
LAM:E's theory of orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinates 3, or some other mathematically equivalent procedure, to obtain curvilinear components of Cartesian 
tensors. Viewed as scalars, these components have a common dimension, which 
is the physical dimension of the Cartesian tensor which they represent. Under 
co-ordinate transformations they do not transform as simply as do tensor com1 For simplicity, we restriet ourselves to time independent co-ordinate transformations. 2 In principle, this dimension may be arbitrary. In practice, each co-ordinate is a homogeneous function of the reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, so that it is natural to assign it 
the dimension [L K], where K is the degree of the homogeneaus function. 3 The method is given in [1840, 1], [1859, 1, Les;ons 1-2]; a typical application, in 
[1841, 2, §§VII-VIII], [1859, 1, §§ 144-147]. 
Sect. 9. Absolute dimensions of tensors. 799 
ponents. Since Rrccr and LEVI-CEVITA1 set down the foundations of tensor 
calculus, there has been an increasing tendency to use tensor components in 
place of LAME's, primarily because tensor components transform more simply 
under co-ordinate transformations. In treating Cartesian tensors having dimensions, one fixes the units and transforms the components according to the appropriate tensor law. Having done so, one can assign a dimension to each component of the tensor consistent with the tensor law, the dimension assigned to 
the Cartesian tensor, and the dimensions assigned to the co-ordinates. In general, 
thesedimensionswill be different for different components and from those of the 
Cartesian tensor. At least for an absolute tensor t, the dimension of the scalar 
which we denote by the Russian letter ,Il,, 
n = lit tk ... m ~t- k ... m ' (8.1) 
will be unaltered by co-ordinate transformations, and it is customary to regard 
this dimension as the physical dimension of t. 
Apparently McCoNNELL 2 was the first to give a satisfactory explanation of 
the relation between the "components" of mathematical physics and tensor 
components for tensors of arbitrary order. His method might be explained as 
follows. Given a tensor field referred to an orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinate 
system, let its physical components 3 at a given point be defined as its corresponding 
tensor components, at that point, in a reetangular Cartesian system whose axes 
are parallel to the co-ordinate curves at the point. In mathematical physics, 
the term "components" usually means these physical components, which henceforth we denote by t <k ... m). A simple method of calculating them will be 
given in Sect. 10. 
Using tensor methods, one can easily obtain components of tensors in oblique co-ordinate 
systems. Various methods have been used to motivate definitions of physical components 
of tensors in such systems, so arranged that the dimension of each physical component of t 
is its physical dimension. Same of the different formulae, all of which are equivalent to 
McCoNNELL's when the co-ordinate system is orthogonal, will be discussed below. 
9. Absolute dimensions of tensors. From the viewpoint of invariant theory, 
the kernel of the problern is that tensor components transform according to simple 
laws under co-ordinate, but not dimensional transformations, while, for the somewhat ambiguously defined physical components, the situation is reversed. If 
we desire components which transform simply under both types of transformations, 
as is much to be wished for dimensional analysis of tensor equations and for 
other questions of invariance, we must either in effect. stay with Cartesian COordinate systems or eise reshape our notions concerning dimensions of tensors. 
Tobegin the latter, it is natural to attempt to represent entities by tensors which 
retain a fixed dimension under arbitrary Co-ordinate transformations. ScHouTEN4, and DoRGELO and ScHOUTEN 5 have shown how this can be done in a 
logically sound manner. The essential idea is to regard co-ordinates as mere 
labels, devoid of metrical significance. One could argue, with some force, that 
science has been hampered by the needless habit of taking co-ordinates as me1 [1901, 1]. 
2 [1931, 1, Appendix, § 2]. THIRRING [1925, 3, § 2] had explained the connection between physical and tensorial components of the stress tensor. 3 The name "physical components" had been used earlier, e.g. by HENCKY [1925, 4], 
who noted that normal physical components and normal mixed components of second order 
tensors coincide. 
4 [1951, 1, Chap. 5]. 5 These authors [1946, 1] remark that their discussion is extracted from whatappears 
tobe an early, unpublished version of [1951, 1]. 
800 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 9. 
tric1• According to the usual intuitive interpretations, a dimensional transformation does not rearrange the points of physical space. In assigning dimensions to 
co-ordinates, one generally has in mind that the co-ordinates themselves are to 
change in adefinite way when the units are transformed. Technically, any such 
change is a co-ordinate transformation 2• lf we regard Co-ordinates as mere Iabels, 
we should not distinguish these transformations from any others or, more precisely, we should always transform the co-ordinate differentials according to the 
law 
d *" o:f•k d ". 
X = olf"' X ' (9.1) 
regardless of what dimensional transformations take place. In other words, 
daJ* is regarded as a contravariant vector having the dimension [1]. ScHOUTEN, 
and DoRGELO and ScHOUTEN call the dimensions assigned to tensors by this 
scheme absolute dimensions. In setting up a correspondence between absolute 
and physical dimensions, one is guided by the notion that, for absolute scalars, 
they coincide. For example, the element of arc ds2 =g11 ". dx" dx"' is regarded as 
an absolute scalar having the absolute and physical dimension [L2]. Using 
Eq. (9.1}, we have 
ds2 (L *) = g11 ". (aJ*, L *} dx* 11 dx*"', } 
=L2ds2 (L)=L2g (aJ L)dx'dXS=L2g (aJ L) ox' ~x·-dx*"dx*"' (9.2) " ' rs ' ax•k 8x*"' 
for arbitrary dx" from which we conclude that 
g"". ( aJ * ' L*)-- g,. ( aJ, L) ax•k ox' ~~L2 ax•m ' (9-3) 
assuming, as usual, that g11 ".=g". 11 • In other words, the metric tensor is regarded 
as a covariant tensor having the absolute dimensions [L2]. According to Eq. (9.3}, 
g11 ". is not fixed uniquely until we specify the co-ordinate system x" and the unit L. 
To put it another way, in a given co-ordinate system, g"". is determined only 
to within a constant factor, L being assumed to be independent of position. 
Werewe to allow L to: vary with position, the multiplication by L2 in Eq. (9.3) 
would be formally identical to the "gauge transformation" introduced by WEYL 3 
in his unified theory of relativity, the intuitive motivation being similar also. 
Mathematically, one can define a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system z" 
based on the unit L of length tobe one suchthat g,.".(z, L) =<5"".. From Eq. (9.3), 
any two such systems are related by a transformation z*" = z* 11 (z), L • = L -1 L 
such that _ Oz' ozS 2 
<5"".- <5,. oz*" oz*"' L • (9.4) 
lf one regards a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system based on the unit of 
length as obtained by the usual intuitive construction wherein one measures off 
equallengths in mutually orthogonal directions, one can check that Eq. (9.4) 
is the transformation law which should relate the metric tensors <511 ". of any 
two such systems. Intuitively, if we have two such systems, z*" and z", with 
1 In explaining why so much time elapsed between the appearance of the special and general theories of relativity, EINSTEIN [1949, 1, p.66] wrote: "Der hauptsächliche Grund liegt 
darin, daß man sich nicht so leicht von der Auffassung befreit, daß den Koordinaten eine 
unmittelbare metrische Bedeutung zukommen müsse." 2 A clear description of what constitutes a co-ordinate system and a co-ordinate transformation is given by THOMAS [1944, 1]. 3 [1918, 1]. 
Sect. 10. Anholonornic cornponents. 801 
common co-ordinate axes, based on the units L * and L, respectively, the numbers 
z*k and zk assigned as co-ordinates to the same geometric point will be related 
by the transformation z*k = L zk, which, in the present scheme, is to be regarded 
as a co-ordinate transformation, so that we transform co-ordinates and units 
simultaneously. With this interpretation, we have 
~ oz' oz• L2 - ~ (L-1 ~') (L-1 ;;s) L2- ~ u,. Tz•k 8~*m -Urs uk Um - ukm• (9.5) 
in agreement with Eq. (9.4). Cases where the co-ordinate axes of one system 
are rotated and translated relative to those of the other can be checked similarly. 
To secure consistency with the notion that ö!:, is a mixed tensor unaffected 
by dimensional transformations, we must regard the inverse gkm of the metric 
tensor as a contravariant tensor having the absolute dimension [L-2]. It is clear 
that associated tensors, though we generally think of them as being different 
components of the same tensor, cannot have the same absolute dimensions. Thus 
there is a certain artificiality inherent in the concept of absolute dimension, 
but it is objectionable only if one attributes intrinsic significance to dimensions 1. 
Otherwise it is no more disturbing than the fact that a tensor is represented by 
different sets of (associated) components. Some writers 2 have argued that 
convention plays such an important role in determining the dimensions we assign 
to quantities that, on logical grounds, there is little reason to impute intrinsic 
significance to them and that attempts to do so have only led to fruitless controversies. ScHOUTEN 3 and DoRGELO and ScHOUTEN 4 seek to make plausible that 
absolute dimensions indicate the type of measurements required to determine 
the components to which they correspond, and point out that frequently one 
set of components is, in some sense, more natural than others. For example, 
dxk is most naturally considered as a contravariant vector, though, in the usual 
terminology, gkm dxm is the same vector. 
Given the absolute dimension of a tensor t, we can calculate its physical dimensions taking these to be the absolute or, equivalently, physical dimensions 
of the scalar .Ut, given by Eq. (8.1). For example, the physical dimension of 
the vector dxk is that of (dxk dxk)~ = ds, i.e. [L]. It follows that the physical 
dimension of t can be obtained by multiplying the absolute dimensions of any 
one of the associated tensors representing it by L K, where K is the number of 
contravariant indices less the number of covariant indices. We call a tensor 
dimensionless if and only if its physical dimension is [1]. The metric tensor is 
thus dimensionless, for .Il,1 = (gkm gkm)~ = n~ in n dimensions. 
10. Anholonomic components. In an n-dimensional space, consider n linearly 
independent contravariant vectors e~ and the reciprocal set e~ satisfying 
( 10.1) 
where we employ the summation convention for diagonally repeated German 
indices. For a given tensor t, one can form the scalars 
ta ... bc ... b = tk... ":. ... s e~ ... e~ e~ ... e~ , ( 1 0.2) 
equal in number to the tensor components. These are called anholonomic components of t, more properly, anholonomic components of t relative to the 
1 EsNAULT-PELTERIE [1945, 1] is perhaps the rnost ardent proponent of the notion that 
one should. 
2 Cf. LANGHAAR [ 19 SO, 3] for references and discussion. 
3 [1951, 1, Chap. 5]. 4 [1946, 1]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 51 
802 ] . L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 11. 
vectors1 ea. Inverting Eq. (10.2), we obtain 
tk..·":. ... s =ta ... bc ••• be~ ... eb'e~ ... e~. (10-3) 
For any given set of e's, associated tensors will, in general, have different anholonomic components unless e~ = e~, which is the case if and only if the ea 
are mutually orthogonal unit vectors. If the vectors e~ have the absolute dimension [L-1], i.e. are dimensionless, the dimension of each of the scalars ta ... bc ... b 
will be the physical dimension of t. 
If the ea are chosen as unit vectors tangent to the co-ordinate lines of a fixed 
orthogonal curvilinear co-ordinate system, the scalars Eq. (10.2) become numerically 
equal to McCoNNELL's physical components t(k ... m) in that system. In threedimensional spaces, the matrices of the two sets of e's become in this case 
_1_ 0 
~ 0 V.f~ 0 0 
lle!ll = 0 1 0 lle~ll = 0 Vg22 0 (10.4) yg22 
0 0 _1_ 
Vgaa 
0 0 Vgaa 
so that 
t ( k ... m r ... s) = ta ... bc ... b !5~ ... !5b' !5; ... !5~, l 
= ( gkk · • • g,...,. )! t11 ···"' (unsummed), g" .. • gss r ... s 
= (gkk ... 55)~tk...s = (gkk •.. g55)-i tk •.. s (unsummed). 
( 1 o. 5) 
b) Physical components. 
11. Vectors as directed line segments. Since McCoNNELL's definition of physical 
components in orthogonal co-ordinates is entirely satisfactory, whatever definition is used for an oblique system should be consistent with this. Since the only 
reason for introducing physical components is to obtain quantities simpler to 
interpret physically than are tensor components, the definition should rest on 
simple intuitive notions. We frequently think of a vector v as a directed line 
segment 2, regarding its "components" v(k) as directed line segments which are 
tangent to the co-ordinate lines and to be added according to the parallelogram 
rule to form v itself. For v2 to be the squared length of a diagonal of a parallelepiped whose edges are tangent to the co-ordinate curves at x and are of lengths 
v(k), the physical components v(k) must be given by 
v(k) = Vgu v11 = Vg 1111 t"' v,.. (k unsummed). (11.1) 
Hence v2 = 2: c11 ,.. v(k)v(m), where c11 ,.. is the cosine of the angle between the k,m 
x11 and x"' Co-ordinate curves: c11 ,..=g11 ,../Vgkkgmm (unsummed). The physical 
components (11.1) all have the same dimension, the dimension of v, andin an 
orthogonal system they reduce to McCONNELL's components. 
Rrccr and LEvr-CrvrTA 3 introduced these and three other sets of components, 
v11JVf;;, v11Jyg» and v11 Vgkk which share the properties just stated but have different geometrical interpretations. 
1 The reference system ea and ea is sometimes called an anholonomic co-ordinate system, 
provided the vectors ea are not all gradient vectors. See SCHOUTEN [1954, 4, Chap. Il] 
for further discussion and references to relevant literature. 
2 We follow TRUESDELL [1953, 2]. 3 [1901, 1, Chap. I, § 4]. 
Sects. 12, 13. Physical components of tensors. 803 
12. Physical components of vectors as anholonomic components. When Coordinates are assigned dimensions, under change of units they suffer transformations of the form 
( 12.1) 
where the A.'s are positive constants. From the point of view of absolute dimensions, under the transformation (12.1) the components of the metric tensor 
transform according to Eq. (12.J), so that ygkk(x*)=Vgkk(A.k)-1 L (unsummed). 
Thus the quantities e~, given by 
e~ = Vgkk <5~ (12.2) 
in the co-ordinate systems related by Eq. (12.1), transform under Eq. (12.1) as 
covariant vectors having the absolute dimension [L]. This transformation law, 
tagether with the specification (12.2) of the ea in these preferred co-ordinate 
systems, gives a consistent definition of these vectors in all co-ordinate systems. 
By Eq. (10.2), the anholonomic components of a contravariant vector v relative 
to these are given by 
va = vk e~ = vk ygkk <5~ = v(k) <5~, (12.3) 
the latter two equations holding only in the frames where the ea are given by 
Eq. (12.2). Thus the physical components v(k), given by Eq. (11.1) in any of 
the co-ordinate systems related by Eq. (12.1), can be regarded as anholonomic 
components relative to the vectors ea. In the preferred systems, the components 
of the set e" reciprocal to ea are given by e~ = (gkk)-! b~. Hence v, considered as 
a covariant vector, has anholonomic components 
Va = Vk e~ = Vk (gkk)-; b~ = gmk vk(gmm)-! b~ = L ckm v(k) b~, (12.4) k,m 
where the ckm are the direction cosines defined in Sect. 11. Hence Va and va 
can be regarded as covariant and contravariant components of v in a rectilinear 
but not necessarily reetangular Co-ordinate system whose axes are tangent to 
the xk co-ordinate curves at a given point, ckm being the metric tensor in this 
system. 
13. Physical components of tensors. Several authors 1 have defined physical 
components of second order tensors. The definitions differ except in the case of 
orthogonal co-ordinates, when they are all equivalent to McCoNNELL's. All 
authors make some attempt to avoid introducing physical components of the 
metric tensor, TRUESDELL, noting that in classical physics tensors are always 
defined in terms of vectors and scalars, in these definitions replaces the tensorial 
components of the vectors by their expressions in terms of physical components; 
the requirement that the physical components of the tensor being defined shall 
be related to the physical components of the given vectors in just the same way 
as the respective tensorial components are related then yields unique definitions 
for the physical components of the particular tensor being defined, as had been 
observed by other authors in special cases. 
Even if one picks uniquely defined components, such as v(k), for vectors, one 
does not obtain a unique definition for physical components of all second order 
tensors. TRUESDELL uses equations defining the stress tensor in terms of vectors 
to motivate definitions which he later 2 shows correspond to the anholonomic 
components tg and tg relative to the vectors ea discussed in Sect. 12. For tensors 
1 SYNGE and ScHILD [1949, 1, § 5.1], ÜLLENDORFF [1950, 1, III 5]. GREEN and 
ZERNA [1950, 2, Eq. (5.16)), TRUESDELL [1953, 2). 
2 [1954, 1]. 
51* 
804 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 14. 
defined by scalar equations such as the strain tensor and the stretching tensor, 
one can motivate use of tab for physical components. Considering the inverse of 
such a tensor when it exists, one can motivate use of tab. In orthogonal Coordinates, these four sets coincide and correspond to McCoNNELL's components. 
In general co-ordinates, the four sets tg, tt tab• and tab may be regarded as associated tensor components of t in a rectilinear but not necessarily reetangular Coordinate system, based on the unit of length and having axes tangentat the given 
point to the co-ordinate curves of the given curvilinear system. 
Plainly TRUESDELL's method is included as a special case in the method of rectilinear 
co-ordinates, just described. The latter has the advantage of being direct rather than inductive; the former, that out of the several sets of physical components provided by the 
latter it selects one which is suggested by the physical situation giving rise to the tensor. 
Both schemes are easily extended in the flexible method of anholonomic components. 
Possibly a method sufficiently general as to cover every proposal which might appeal 
on some or another intuitive grounds could be constructed. In this connection we mention 
only that the method of anholonomic components, which appears quite general, does not 
include GREEN and ZERNA's definition. lt seems, however, that in a given situation only 
one set of physical components is wanted, and appropriateness rather than generality should 
be the aim. 
We shall use physical components only in orthogonal co-ordinate systems, 
when they are given by Eq. (10.5). 
14. Covariant differentiation. Our object is a formula giving the anholonomic 
components of the covariant derivative of a tensor directly in terms of the derivatives of the anholonomic components. Set 8a = e~ o~k-. Then 
( 14.1) 
Using Eq. (10.2), we may rewrite this as 
( 14.2) 
where 
( 14-3) 
Similarly, for a tensor t of any order we have 
ta ... b _ 8 ta ... b + tf ... b r.a + ... + ta ... f F.b _ } · c ... b, e - e c. .. b c ... b e f c ... b e f 
- ta ... b F.f - ... - ta ... b r..f f ... b ec c. .. f eb• 
(14.4) 
formally identical with the rule for covariant differentiation based on an affine 
connection Facb. 
It is important to note that in general Fa\ =I= rbca; the antisymmetric part, r[~ bl = 
e~ o[a et,1 = - e~b e::J Oekfo xm, sometimes called "the object of anholonomity" 1, vanishes if 
and only if all the ea be gradient vectors. 
Tuming now to McCoNNELL's physical components, we use the special choice 
of e's given by Eq. (10.4). Writing 
( 14.5) 
1 Cf. ScHOUTEN [1954, 4, Chap. II], [1951, 1, Chap. IV]. 
Sect. 15. Definition of double tensors. 805 
the latter being the directional derivative along the x" co-ordinate curve. By 
Eq. (25.3) we find that 
F(kmn) = 0 unless m =!= n 
a lfii- F<kkm> =--"-log fg""' uSm 
and k =m 
k=j=m, (14.6) 
k=j=m. 
To calculate physical components of derivatives, one has only to substitute these 
formulae into 
t(k ... m,P>=a:p t(k ... m) +F<Pqk)t(q ... m>+ ··· +} (14.7) 
+F<pqm)t(k ... q), 
which is the form that Eq. (14.4) now assumes 1. 
Ill. Double tensor fields. 
a) Definition and examples. 
15. Definition of double tensors. Let ~ and X be points in two spaces of 
dimensions n and N, respectively, over which differentiable co-ordinate transformations ~*=~* (~) andX* =X* (X) aredefined. The quantities Tlj.:::~ Z:::;' constitute 
a double tensor if they obey the transformation law for a tensor of type Tlf.:::~ 
when the X co-ordinates are transformed, for a tensor of type tZ:::;' when the 
~ co-ordinates are transformed. Precisely the quantities T*K0,···0
KM k, ... km (X* ~*) , t··· L qt ... q, ' 
and T~:::Jt ~:::::;n(X, ~) are said tobe the components 2 in the X*,~* and X,~ 
co-ordinate systems, respectively, of a double tensor field of weight W, w, of 
the contravariant order M, m, and of covariant order L, l if 3 
T*K, ... KJJlk, ... km =IX/X* Iw 1~/~*lw ax·K~ ... oX*KM X ) Q, ... QL q, ... qz oxR, iJXRM 
X 0:.s~ ... 8?{.s;;.- ~:::.' ... _a0x::: :::;, ... ~:;: T~::::~: ;::::;~. ( 15.1) 
As a special case, it follows that the components of a double tensor of the 
type Tlf,::: ~ transform as scalars und er ~-transformations: In other words, ordinary 
tensor fields are included as a special kind of double fields. On the other band, 
it is Iegitimate to regard double tensors as ordinary tensors under a restricted 
group of transformations in the space whose points are the ordered pairs (~.X), 
but this view does not usually promote the intended applications. 
Generalization to the case of any finite number of spaces is immediate but 
will not be needed in this appendix. 
1 This rule was given in a more explicit form by TRUESDELL [1953. 1], who recorded 
also fully explicit expressions for the gradients of a vector and of a second order tensor. 
2 There is possible ambiguity in specialization to particular components. E.g., is T12 the 
result of putting k = 1, K = 2 in yk K, or the result of putting k = 2, K = 1 in yK k ? In the few 
cases where such ambiguity might arise, we avoid it by using peculiar letters for co-ordinates. 
E.g., if the system at Xis reetangular Cartesian (X, Y, Z), while that at :1! is cylindrical polar 
(r, {}, z). the two possibilities just mentioned will be denoted by yx{) and T'y, respectively. 
3 In principle, this concept derives from CLEBSCH [1872, 4, §§ 3-5]; cf. TucKER 
[1931, 5, § 1] and, from a different standpoint, EINSTEIN and BARGMANN [1944. 4, § 1]. 
806 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 16. 
We shall use double tensor fields in three different interpretations: 
(X) N < n and the space of Xis a !esser-dimensional subspace of the space of re, 
or, if we like, a surface1 within it; the subspace is defined by a mapping 
( 15 .2) 
whereby a point with Co-ordinates X in the subspace is regarded as the same 
point as that whose Co-ordinates in the embedding space are ~(X). 
ß) N =n, the subspace defined by Eq. (15.2) is of the same dimension as 
the embedding space and may coincide with it; the mapping {15.2) is tobe interpreted as a deformation of the space. 
y) N =n, and no mapping (15.2) is presumed; re and X are regarded as Coordinates of two points in the same space 2• 
These cases, which do not exhaust the possible interpretations of double 
fields, we shall explore in reverse order. 
16. Euclidean shifters. If in a Euclidean space we choose to employ Cartesian 
co-ordinates, the sum of the components of two tensors of the same order evaluated 
at different points of space, or the integral of a 
Z ----V---- tensor field over a curve, surface, or region, is a 
Cartesian tensor of the same order. Under general 
co-ordinate transformations, such sums or integrals 
do not transform as tensors. In Euclidean space it 
---- is possible to define tensorially invariant operations 
z --v which reduce to these sums or integrals in Cartesian 
co-ordinate systems. For such purposes, the operation of finite parallel displacement, or shifting, 
Fig. 1. Shifting. is fundamental. Let VK denote the components in a 
reetangular Cartesian co-ordina te system of a vector 
V defined at the point Z. At any other point z, there exists a vector v, whose 
components v11 in this frame, in order, have the same numerical values as those 
of V. That is, trivially, 
vk=~~VK, VK=bf{v11 . (16.1) 
In Euclidean space, we are accustomed to regarding v and V as the same vector; 
we say v is obtained from Vby (finite) parallel displacement from Z to z (Fig. 1), 
or for short, we shift the vector from Z to z. 
To put this concept in invariant 3 form, we introduce arbitrary4 transformations x11 = x" (z), XK = XK (Z), regard v and V as contravariant vectors, obtaining from (16.1) 
vm (re) ozk = ~~~ yM (X) azK_ a~m K axM' 
which can be rewritten as 
1 The terms "variety" and "hypersurface" are often used. 
2 MICHAL [1927, J § 4). 
(16.2) 
( 16.3) 
3 EINSTEIN [1944, 5, § 1]. We follow DoYLE and ERICKSEN [1955. 1] and TouPIN [1956,1]. 
The geometrically inclined reader will see that the shifters may be regarded as operators for 
converting ordinary components to anholonomic components (Sect. 12), but the viewpoint 
of anholonomic components does not promote the intended interpretation. 
' One can regard ~" and xK as Co-ordinates of different points in the same co-ordinate 
system, or, as is sometimes convenient, as co-ordinates of different points in independently 
selected co-Qrdinate systems. 
Sect. 16. Euclidean shifters. 807 
where 
M - s.K oXM ()zk 
g m= u,. -K """' oZ uX 
(16.4) 
It follows easily that 
g~ gMm = b~, g'M giS, = b~. (16.5) 
In the sense indicated by Eq. (16.3), gmM and gMm shift contravariant vectors from 
X to :ll and :ll to X, respectively, so we call them shifters. If we proceed similarly 
but regard v and V as covariant vectors, we obtain 
Vm (:ll) = gm M (:ll, X) vm (X). VM (X) = gMm (X, al) Vm (:ll). ( 16.6) 
where these inverse shifters are given by 
M- s.K oXM ()zk 
gm = Uf< -K- """'• oZ uX 
From Eqs. (16.4) and (16.7) we see that 
g,.K = gK,., gl = fK· 
(16.7) 
(16.8) 
Using the rules of association vm(:ll) =gm,.(:ll) v"(:ll), ~(X) =gMK(X) VK(X), or 
by direct calculation using the defining equations of the metric tensor, one can 
verify that 
M ..k KM 
gm =gmk5Kg • (16.9) 
as suggested by the notation. From Eqs. (16.8) and (16.9), we see that all these 
shifters can be obtained from any one by raising or lowering indices with the 
appropriate metric tensor; in particular, the inverse shifters fK and g~ are so 
related. It is thus unambiguous to use the same kerne! index for all shifters and 
to write gl- in place of fK or gl, and gf in place of n or g,.K, which We henceforth do. 
Under further co-ordinate transformations, (K transforms as a contravariant 
vector under transformations of the form :ll* =:ll* (:ll) and as a covariant vector 
under transformations of the form X* =X* (X) while gf transforms as in an inverse 
manner, as follows immediately from Eq. (16.4). 
From Eq. (16.4) we have, for any triple of points :~:*, :ll and X, 
rl 
K (:ll* ' - X)_ bm 
M oz*m ox•~ oXK- azM _ bm 
s oz*m ox*" ox' ozS 8x' oz" b" 
U oXK' azu l = g~(al*, al) gic(:ll, X), 
g: (X, al*) = gt (al, al*) g~ (X, al). 
(16.10) 
These formulae show that the rule of composition for shifting is the ordinary 
matrix rule. 
To shift from X to .:ll any absolute tensor Tff:::r defined at X, we transvect 
all indices with shifters, obtaining for the shifted components 
T§.::vM gl-... g':r g~ ... gJ:. (16.11) 
From Eq. (16.9) we obtain gKM g: g! = gkm• so the shifted components of gKM 
are g,. m; hence length and angle are preserved by shifting, i.e. f5K M ~K VgM = gK MX 
g: g~ v~ v;'= g11 ". v~ v;' for any pair of vectors. 
The process of transvecting a single index with a shifter we shall describe as 
converting that index. 
808 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect 17. 
Had we transformed V and v as relative vectors, we should have been led to a somewhat 
different rule for shifting. For a relative tensor T of weight w, reasoning similar to that 
used above Ieads one to regard 
J det g~Jw T{f:ß g~ ... g~ g~ ... g ;' { 16.12) 
as the shifted components of T. 
As a check on Eqs. (16.11) and (16.12), we note from [Eq. (16.4)] that lf = fJXKjfJxk 
and g~ = oxkjfJXK when the two points coincide. Shifting then reduces to a co-ordinate 
transformation, and we should obtain the components of the same tensor in the transformed 
co-ordinate system, as indeed follows from Eqs. (16.11) and (16.12). 
There are infinitely many relative tensors, of different weights, which correspond to a 
given Cartesian tensor. It is common to eliminate this ambiguity by using only absolute and 
axial tensors (Sect. 2). The shifted components of an axial tensor are given by 
eT{f·::f g~ ... g~ g~ ... g;', {16.13) 
where e = sgn det g~. 
In Eqs. {16.4), leave the reetangular Cartesian system fixed but transform 
the general co-ordinate systems at ~ and X to arbitrary new systems ~· =~* (~) 
and X* =X* (X). From Eq. {16.4h it follows that 
*m- k ox*m ozK _ k ox•m oxP ozK ()XP ) 
gM =(JK----azk ()XfocM- (JK oxP ---aik- oXP oX*M' 
ox*m oXP 
= g'tp oxP fJX*M . 
(16.14) 
Hence g~ is an absolute double tensor of covariant order 1, 0 and contravariant 
order 0, 1 consistently with the positions and numbers of its indices. 
17. Addition and integration in Euclidean space. To obtain a tensorially invariant sum of tensors of the same type, defined at different points of a Euclidean 
space, one can shift all these to an arbitrarily selected point ~. then add. This 
sum is a tensor of the same type, defined at ~- For example, the vector equation 
u =V +W, where V and Ware vectors defined at X and X*, respectively, may 
be read 
uk(a:) = vk(~) + wk (~)' } 
= g~ (a:, X) yK (X) + g~ (~. X*) WK (X*). {17.1) 
As follows immediately from Eq. {16.10), adding at a: and then shifting to a:* 
yields the same sum as is obtained by shifting directly to a:*, then adding. 
For example, if pk and pK are position vectors of the points a: and X from 
the same fixed point 0z, as defined in Sect. 2, then the vector from X to ~ has 
the co-ordinates pk-g~PK and gfpk_pK in the co-ordinates at ~ and X, 
respectively. 
Similarly, one can form a tensorially invariant integral of a tensor field by 
shifting the field to an arbitrary fixed point ~. then integrating the shifted components, so obtaining a tensor defined at ~. as indicated by the example below. 
If xk and XK in a three-dimensional space are referred to the same cylindrical polar system 
given by zl=rcosD, z2=rsinit, z"d=z, Zl=Rcos@, Z2=RsinEJ, zs=z, by Eq. (16.4) 
we obtain 
cos(D-EJ) Rsin(D-EJ) 0 
llg}li = (Rjr)sin(EJ-fJ) (Rjr)cos(EJ-{}) 0 • {17.2) 
0 0 
Suppose that having the contravariant components AR, Ae, AZ of a vector A as functions 
of R, e, and Z, we are to calculate the vector integral 'll==f A dV. Using Eq. (16.3), we 
" 
Sect. 18. Partial covariant differentiation of a double tensor field. 
then shift A to the fixed point (r, f}, z), obtaining components given by 
a'=ARcos(fJ-B)+AeRsin(fJ-0),) 
raO= ARsin(B- fJ) + Ae Rcos(B- fJ), 
az = AZ. 
809 
(17.3) 
In this co-ordinate system, dV = R dR dE) dZ. The vector ~. thought of as defined at (r, f}, z), 
may be calculated from 
~r = f a'(r, fJ, z, R, B,Z) R dR d@ dZ, V 
(17.4) ~/J = f aO(r, f}, z, R, @,Z) R dR dE) dZ, V 
~z = f aZ(r, f}, Z, R, e. Z) R dR d@ dZ. V 
Here (r, f}, z), being a fixed point, may be chosen so as to make the integrations as simple 
as possible. 
More generally, to integrate an absolute tensor field T (X) over a curve, surface, 
or region, we introduce the element of arc, surface or volume in the XK co-ordinate 
system, shift all components to a fixed point x as indicated by Eq. (16.11), then 
integrate these components. That these components are components of an 
absolute tensor defined at x follows at once from the transformation laws of the 
shifters and the fact that x is a fixed point. It follows from Eq. (16.10) that 
shifting from x to x* after integrating yields the same components as would be 
obtained by shifting from X to x* and then integrating, since the quantities 
g~ (x, x*) and g/. (x, x*) are independent of the variables of integration. Relative 
tensors can be treated similarly. 
To illustrate these remarks we consider the integral ~ = JA dV, which, in component 
form, may be written v 
~k(;r*) = fgk(;r*, X) AK(X) dV(X) = f g~(;r*, ;r) gf<(;r, X) AK (X) dV(X)l V V 
= g~ (;r*, ;r) f gf<(;r, X) AK (X) dV(X), V 
= g~ (;r* • ;r) ~r (;r). 
( 17. 5) 
If we take x* k and xm tobe Co-ordinates of the same point in different co-ordinate systems, 
then g:(;r*, ;r) = ox*kfox', and Eq. (16.3) shows that A' transforms as a contravariant 
vector. If we hold the x* k Co-ordinate system fixed but transform the co-ordinates XK, 
the functions gkAK, and hence the quantities Ak, transform as absolute scalars. 
18. Partial covariant differentiation of a double tensor field. Returning to the 
general concept of double field as presented in Sect. 15, suppose now that both 
the space of x and the space of X be affine spaces, with respective connections 
rtq and FjfQ. We employ the notation T:::,M to denote the covariant derivative 
of T::: (x, X) with respect to X when x is kept constant. Thus for example, 
Tk - oTkK rt Tk TkK ~ ()Tk~ +F.k TPK 
K,M = ()XM- KM p, ,m oxm mp ' ( 18.1) 
where in oTkKfoXM we hold constant not only XP for P=f=.M but also all the xm 
and analogously for oTkKfoxm. It is easy to verify that T.::;M and T.·::;m aredouble 
fields of the tensor character suggested by the positions and numbers of their 
indices, and that the covariant derivatives of a double field obey the usual formal 
rules of covariant differentiation. 
Foratensor of the specialtype Tt.:·.t(x), we have 
oTk ... m 
yk...m = ~._.q_ = 0 
p ... q,K axK . 
but no such result holds for a tensor of the type Tt:::qm (x, X). 
(18.2) 
810 JoL. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fieldso Secto 19. 
N ow consider the case when the space of re is metric, and the connection Ffq 
is based on the metric tensor g,.(re)o Then 
g,s,q = 0, g,s,K = 0, ( 18° 3) 
where the former result follows as in ordinary tensor analysis, and the latter is 
a consequence of Eqo {1802). 
Finally, consider a Euclidean space with shifter d as defined in Secto 160 
If we refer both re and X to the same reetangular Cartesian system, we have 
g1c = b1c, and, hence, in this system, 
g1c, M = 0, g1c, m = 0; {18.4) 
since these equations are of double tensor form, they are valid in all co-ordinate 
system1• 
These results show that in a Euclidean space the tensors gk m, g1c, gf{, and gKM, 
considered as double tensor functions of pairs of points, behave as constants 
under partial covariant differentiationo Therefore, 
{18o5) 
so that partial covariant dijjerentiation commutes with shijtingo However, in general 
T:::k,m g'f( =I= T:::k,K· {1806) 
Hence follows the caution; a differentiated index may not be convertedo 
b) The total covariant derivative. 
19. Doubletensors associated with a surface. When there is a mapping (1502) 
defining a surface, certain double tensor functions of points re, X in the n-dimensional embedding space and the N-dimensional surface may be constructed directly from the mappingo Setting 
k - k - oxk 
X;K= X,K= oXK' ( 19o1) 
we find that under the double transformation re* =re* (re), X* =X* (X), we have 
(19o2) 
Comparison with Eqo (15o1) shows that x7K is an absolute double jield of contravariant order 0, 1 and covariant order 1, 0. 
For the interpretation in surface theory, where N < n, it is convenient to 
write vr in place of XK. The quantity x7r is a tangent vector to the vr Co-ordinate 
curve on the surface, since a differential along that curve is given by dxk = x~r dVr 
(unsummed). At each point of the surface, N linearly independent tangent 
vectors are given by X~r. r = 1' 2, 0 0 0' N. 
A covariant tensor n is said to be normal to the N-dimensional surface if 
nk, k,o 0 ok, x7'r, x7T, 0 0 . .x7'r, = 0 0 
A normal tensor of order n-N is given by 
8 n = 8 xkn-N+l xkn-N+2 xkn FxF1 ••• rN k1 k ••.. k,._N k1 k1 ••• k,._Nkn-N+l ... k11 ;F1 ;F1 •·• ;FN' 
{19°3) 
(19.4) 
Any n of order n-N is a scalar multiple if the n just definedo For example, in 
three-dimensional space we may consider surfaces of dimensions 1 and 2, the 
1 TOUPIN (1956, 2, § 3). 
Sect. 20. Definition of the total covariant derivative based on a mapping. 811 
former being called curves. In these two cases we have xk = xk (V) and xk = xk (Vl, 
V2), respectively, and Eq. (19.4) yields 
( 19. 5) 
The former equation gives a covariant, skew-symmetric normal tensor, and all 
vectors normal to the curve xk = xk (V) may be obtained by taking the scalar 
product of this tensor nkm by other vectors; i.e., any normal vector is of the form 
cxd;efdV for some c. The second of Eqs. (19.5) gives a covariant normal vector 
to the surface xk=xk(V1, V2). The tensors n defined by Eqs. (19.4) and (19.5) 
aredouble tensors of weight 1, -1, not absolute tensors. In the case of a normal 
vector, Eq. (19.3) reduces to 
nkx~r=O; hence (oAnk) x~r+nkoAx~r=O, 
where OA = ojoVA. 
(19.6) 
In a metric space with metric tensor g an induced surface metric a is given by 
(19.7) 
In a space with positive definite metric, it is customary to replace Eq. (19.4) 
by an analogaus definition in which the absolute tensors e, defined by Eq. (2.3)1 , 
replace the permutation symbols. The n so defined is a normal tensor according 
to Eq. (19-3) but is an absolute rather than relative tensor. 
20. Definition of the total covariant derivative based on a mapping. The partial 
covariant derivatives T:::,k and T:::,K of a double field T (~.X) were defined in 
Sect. 18. Supposing given a mapping x = x (X), we now desire to define a total 
covariant derivative having the following properties: 
1. T.::;R is a double tensor field. 
2. When T is of the special form yK ... M (X) or Tk ... m (x) then Y.·: reduces P ... Q p ... q , ... ,R 
to T:::,R or T:::,, x~R· respectively. 
3. If we first apply the operation " ; R" to T (x, X), then replace x by x (X), 
we obtain the same result as if we apply the operation ";R" to T(x(X), (X). 
When T reduces to a double scalar function of two variables T = T(x, X), the 
partial covariant derivatives reduce to oT(ox and oT(oX, while the desired total 
derivative is just the ordinary derivative: 
dT d ox oT oT 
dX = dX T(x(X), X)= oX ---ax + ax· (20.1) 
The generalization to arbitrary double tensor fields is given by1 
T:::; K = T:::, K + T:::,k X~ K. (20.2) 
The total derivative obeys the usual formal rules of covariant differentiation. 
In the metric case, for example, we have 
gKM;P = 0, gkm;R = 0. (20-J) 
In a Euclidean space, by Eqs. (18.4) wehavealso 
k -o gK;M- ' (20.4) 
1 This derivative was introduced by BORTOLOTTI [1927, 4] and VAN DER WAERDEN 
[1927, 5, §f3] as a special case of the multiple affine differentiation of R. LAGRANGE 
[1926, 3, Chap. II, § 2]. Still more general derivatives were defined by SCHOUTEN and 
v AN KAMPEN [ 1930, 4, § 4] and TucKER [ 1931, 6, §§ 4, 7]; our notation follows the 
)atter. 
812 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 21. 
According to our rule of association, T:::K =gf T:::k, and this notation is supported by the identity 
T···K - (gK T··k) = nK T-··k ... ;M- k ... ;M 5k ... ;M· (20.5) 
(However, T···. _j_gk T···. in general.) We write T···. = (T-··. ). . Also ... ,K-r K ... ,k ... ,KM ... ,K ,M 
T··;K- gKMT···. = (gKMT-··). 0 ..• . .. ,M ... ,M (20.6) 
All the theory presented in this section is valid when N < n and thus may 
be used in all three contexts listed at the end of Sect. 15. In the next section we 
consider some special properlies of the case when N = 2 and n = 3, while in the 
following section we present an important special result valid when n =N. 
21. Some formulae from the ordinary theory of surfaces. We Iist hereinvariant 
forms of those results concerning the theory oftwo-dimensional surfaces embedded 
in Euclidean three-dimensional space to which we shall later refer. Proofs, 
though usually only in reetangular Cartesian spatial co-ordinates, are given in 
works on differential geometry1. 
W e employ the notations introduced in Sect. 19. The metrics a and g are 
related by Eq. (19.7); 
(21.1) 
and the metric a is used to raise and lower surface indices. Following the suggestion 
made at the end of Sect. 19, we discard the definition (19.5) and replace it by 
(21.2) 
where er.1 = al er.1, ekmp =g! ekmp in accord with Eq. (2.3). It follows that 
nkn11 =1, nkx7r=O, n~ox7rA+nk;.1x7r=O, (21.3) 
the first of these being an assertion that n is a unit normal to the surface, while 
the second and third are consequences of Eqs. (19.6). Also 
The second fundamental form b is defined by 
brA =nk x7r.1 =- gkmx7rn~ 
and satisfies the equations of GAuss and WEINGARTEN: 
x7rA = br.1 n11 , n7r=- bf.x7A. 
Also 
n;rA k =- b.tl r;AX;A- k bA b k } r A.1n, 
nk n7r.1 =- bj, bA.1, gkm n7rA x~A =- brA; LI· 
(21.4) 
(21.5) 
(21.6) 
(21.7) 
Conditions of integrability to be satisfied by tensors a and b as necessary 
and sufficient that there exist a surface :I!= :I! (V) such that a and b are its first 
and second quadratic forms are the equations of MAINARDI-CODAZZI and GAuss: 
brA;A = brA;A, RrAA.E = brA bA.E- bAA br.E. (21.8) 
where R is the Riemann tensor based upon a. 
The normal curvature Kctl in the direction of a tangent vector t of unit length 
is given by 
(21.9) 
1 McCoNNELL [1931, I, Chap. XV, § 5] gives the results in double tensor form but 
in the derivations always supposes :1! to be eliminated, although this is not necessary. 
Sects. 22, 23. Conventions for integrals. 813 
The principal curvatures K1 and K2 are the curvatures in the principal directions 
of b. Writing a det arA, b = det brA, for the total curvature K and mean 
curvature K of the surface we have the formulae 
Also 
K = Rl!/2_ = + erA eAL" RrAAL" = -!- = Ilb = K1K2,) 
K = arA brA = bf = Ib = K 1 + K 2 . 
(21.10) 
(21.11) 
22. Properties of the total covariant derivative based on a homeomorphism. 
Returning to the total covariant derivative as defined in Sect. 20, consider the 
case when n=N and the transformation ~=~(X) is a homeomorphism, so 
that there is a single-valued differentiable inverse X =X(~). As mentioned in 
Sect. 15, this case may be visualized as a deformation of the space of X into the 
space of ~. or conversely. 
We may now use the inverse mapping X =X(~) in exactly the same way 
as we used the mapping ~=~(X) in Sect. 20. In particular, writing 
foradouble field T(~. X) we may set 
T:::;k= T:::,k + T:::,KXfk· 
Since 
from Eqs. (20.2) and (22.2) we have the chain rule 1 : 
T·· ·= T·· xk ... ;K .•. ;k ;K• 
IV. Integrals of tensor fields. 
a) Preliminaries. 
(22.1) 
(22.2) 
(22.3) 
(22.4) 
23. Conventions for integrals. While the operation of shifting explained and illustrated in Sects. 16 and 17 permits integration of tensors in curvilinear co-ordinate 
systems in Euclidean space, it is laborious. For the purpose of this treatise it 
suffices when integrating tensors of order greater than 0 to consider reetangular 
Cartesian co-ordinates only. The reader is to recall this convention without further 
reminder. There is no advantage in imposing such a restriction on integrals of 
scalars, for which we continue to employ general curvilinear co-ordinates. 
Suppose 'V is a continuous tensor field of order greater than 0, and suppose 
f'Vdv = 0 (23.1) V 
for all volumes v in a region t. By the above convention, Eq. (23.1) is understood as written in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates. From it follows 
'V=O int (23.2) 
with 'V again written in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates. However, since 'V 
is a tensor, Eq. (23.2) holds in all co-ordinate systems. As a part of the above 
1 BoRTOLOTTI [1927, 4]. 
814 J.L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sects. 24, 25. 
convention we add the understanding that henceforth from an equation of the 
type (23.1) weshall directly infer Eq. (23.2) in generat co-ordinates, without further 
mention. 
24. Smoothness and order. Except in the few places where the degree of 
smoothness of regions, surfaces, and curves is a matter of especial interest, we 
tacitly assume whatever smoothness is necessary. For GREEN's transformation 
(Sect. 26), KELVIN's transformation (Sect. 28) and most other purposes, it 
suffices that bounded regions, surfaces, and curves be regular in the sense of 
KELLOGG1 and that unbounded sets be such that their intersection with every 
sphere is regular. 
We sometimes wish to state conditions conceming the vanishing of integrals 
at infinity. Consider an unbounded region t of space, and let P be any interior 
point. Let ~t> be that portion of the surface of the sphere of radius p with center 
at P which lies in the interior of t. If \1:' be such that 
lim I da \I:'P"' = 0, p_.oo,P (24.1) 
we write 2, respectively, 
\l:'n=ö(p-m-2), \l:'t=o(p-m-2), \l:'=o(p-m-2). (24.2) 
For (24.1) to hold it is clearly sufficient that each component of \l:'n, \l:'t, and \1:', 
respectively, be o (p-"'-8) as P~ oo, which motivates the notation. The symbol o 
may be read "lower mean order than ". 
Weshall frequently wish to state boundary conditions of the following type: 
1. On each finite boundary of v, \1:' = 0. 
2. In any portion of v extending to \1:', 
\1:' = 0 (p-m-2). 
As apart of the convention of Sect. 23, we agree that henceforth 
\1:' = 0 or o(p-"'-8) on ~ (24.3) 
shall serve as an abbreviation for the statements 1 and 2. Analogons conventions are adopted for statements in terms of \l:'n or '*'t· 
b) Circulation, flux, total,. and moments. 
25. Definitions. Let \1:' be any integrable tensor field. The line integral 
I dz · \1:' =I dz,. \l:'k...... (25.1) 1: 1: 
is called the flow of \1:' along the curve c. When c is closed, it is called a circuit; 
the integral (25.1) is then called the circulation of \1:' around c and is written 
~dz· \1:'. {25.2) 1: 
Two curves are reconcilable 3 in a given point set provided one can be continuously 
deformed into the other while remaining in the set. A circuit which can be 
1 [1929, 1, Chap. IV]. 2 The notations were introduced by TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 4]. 3 These concepts and names derive from KELVIN [1869, 1, §58 and § 6o(a)]. Topologists 
use the ward "homotopic" in place of "reconcilable", whereas the latter ward is generally 
employed in mechanics. KELVIN stated that he applied RIEMANN's [1857, 1] theory of 
multiple connectivity as presented by HELMHOLTZ [1858, 1], but the concept of reconcilable 
curves does not appear in these papers. 
Sect. 26. GREEN's transformation. 815 
continuously shrunk to a point while remaining in a given set is said tobe reducible 
in the set. 
The surface integral 
f da· \V (25.3) 4 
is called the flux of \V across the surface 6. When 6 is closed and da is directed 
outward, the integral (25.3) is called1 the flux of \V out of 6 and is written 
~da· \V. (25 .4) 4 
A closed surface which can be continuously shrunk to a point while remaining 
in a given region is said to be reducible in it. 
With the notation (3 .7), the volume integral 
f {p(K) \V} dv (25.5) 
" 
is called the K-th moment of \V with respect to the origin. The zeroth moment, 
f \Vdv (25.6) 
" is called 2 the total \V in v-. 
c) The transformations of GREEN and KELVIN. 
26. GREEN' s transformation. We shall employ Green' s transformation s in the 
forms 
fgrad\Vdv=~da\V, fdiv\Vdv=~da·\V, fcurl\Vdv=fdax\V, (26.1) " d ". d ". d 
where it is assumed that \V is single valued and continuous throughout the closure 
of the finite region v-, bounded by d, that grad \V is continuous throughout a 
finite number of subregions of v- whose sum is v-, and that the volume integrals 
are convergent. In the terminology of Sect. 25, Eq. (26.1) 2 states that the total 
divergence of a quantity in a region is equal to the flux of the quantity out of 
the boundary of the region. 
Another form of GREEN's transformation is 4 
f [b {cp<K-1l} + c{bp<K-1l}- b. cgradp(Kl + ) 
" + (b div c + c div b + curl c x b + curl b x c) p<Kl] d v 
= ~ [da · (b c + c b) p<Kl - da b . c p<Kl] , 4 
(26.2) 
1 This name derives from MAXWELL [1873, 2, §§ 12-13], who called Eq. (25.3) "the 
surface integral of the flux ". 
2 These names derive from TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 6). FöPPL [1897, 1, § 4] introduced 
the quantity (25.6) for a vector, calling it the "Feldsumme". 3 A result equivalent to those listed here was first given by GREEN [1828, 2, pp. 23-26], 
special cases having been stated earlier by LAGRANGE [1762, 1, § 45] and GAuss [1813, 
1, §§ 3-5], ÜSTROGRADSKY [1831, 2] stated an equivalent result as a formula for differentiating triple integrals. The name "GREEN's transformation" was suggested by LovE 
[1892, 2, § 14]; other common names are "GAuss's theorem", "the divergence theorem", 
and" ÜSTROGRADSKY's theorem ". In the early literature, use of this transformation is often 
called "integration by parts ". 4 TRUESDELL [1949, 4], [1951, 3], [1954, 1, § 7J. In the formulae given in these 
papers, {p<n-ll 1} should be replaced by gradp<n>. The case K=O is due to BuRGATTI 
[1931, 3]. 
816 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fie!ds. Sects. 27, 28. 
where b and c are arbitrary continuously differentiable vector fields, p is the 
position vector, and K is any integer. 
27. POINCAR:E's generalization. In n dimensions, the tensor element of area 
of an oriented m-dimensional surface dm, given parametrically by xk = xk ( u), is 
d r ... s- I ~[r. 0. ozS] d 1 d m 
S(m) - m. oul oum U • . . U ' (27.1) 
which transforms as an absolute contravariant tensor of order m under co-ordinate 
transformations, as an absolute scalar under parameter transformations with 
positive Jacobian. Let !lm be bounded by the surface !lm_1 , given parametrically 
by xk = xk (v). Let v be a vector defined on dm_1 , directed outward relative to !lm. 
Arrange the parametrizations so that the vectors vk, oxkjovl, ... , axkjvm-1 and 
8xkj8u1, 00.' axkjoum, in these orders, have the same orientation relative to (jm. 
For any continuously differentiable covariant tensor field t of order m, we then 
have 1 
--- t dsru ... s = --t dsru ... s = t dsu ... s f ox' a u ... s (m) Ja ox[r u ... s] (m) ~ u ... s (m-1). (27.2) 
It then follows from the transformation properties of the integrands that each 
integral transforms as an absolute scalar. The underlying space need not be 
Euclidean or have any other geometrical structure. In metric spaces, or affine 
spaces with a symmetric connection, where covariant differentiation is defined, 
we have a!ru tr ... s]=trr ... s,u]• which makes the invariance of the integrals more 
obvious. Various alternative forms of Eq. (27.2) are available in the literature 2 • 
In three-dimensional Euclidean space, GREEN's transformation may be deduced 
from Eq. (27.2) with m = 3, KELVIN's transformation (Sect. 28) from Eq. (27.2) 
with m=2. 
28. KELVIN's transformation. KELVIN's transformation, commonly 3 called 
" STOKEs' theorem ", is 
J da. curl \j! = cji dz. \j!, (28.1) 6 e 
subject to the usual right-handed screw convention connecting the sense of dz 
with that of da. \j! is assumed continuously differentiable in a region whose 
boundary contains 4 d. It is important to note that the field \j! need not be defined 
on both sides of 6. In the terminology of Sect. 25, Eq. (28.1) states that the 
circulation of a quantity araund a closed circuit equals the flux of its curl across 
any surface bounded by the circuit. 
It is possible to give forms of Eq. (28.1) which contain dz \j! and dzx \j! 
on the right-hand side, in the style of Eq. (28.1). Since these are awkward in 
dyadic notation, we write the former in Cartesian tensor notation as follows; 
(28.2) 
Contradingthis equation on k and m yields Eq. (28.1), while replacing km by 
[km J yields the second alternative mentioned above. 
1 This result is due in essence to POINCARE [1887, 1, § 2], [1895. 1, § 7]. 2 See e.g. ScHOUTEN [1951, 1, Chap. IVl. 3 We follow TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 8] ih departing from usage. See the appendix to 
this section. 
4 See LICHTENSTEIN [1929, 2, Kap. 2, § 3] for references to works proving the result 
under weaker assumptions. 
Sect. 29. Definitions. 817 
Appendix. History of Kelvin's transformation 1• The plane form of Eq. (28.1) was discovered by AMPERE [1826, E1]. The three-dimensional form was discovered by KELVIN, 
who communicated it to STOKES in a letter dated July 2, 1850 {LARMOR's annotation to 
the 1905 reprint of [1854, 1] ). Independent discovery, as weil as priority in publication, is 
due to HANKEL [1861, E 1, § 7] (cf. also RocH [1863, E 1, § 4]). KELVIN's proofs were published later [1867, 1, § 190(j)] [1869, E1, § 60(q)], andin the second of these publications 
he claimed priority. The only connection of STOKES with the matter was to set proof of the 
result as an examination question [1854, T2]. Later KELVIN [1879 ed. of [1867, 1, § 190(j)]J 
mentioned this fact, which had been noted earlier by MAXWELL [1873, 3, § 24], after whose 
custom the common name has been adopted. It was KELVIN who first realized the significance of Eq. (28.1). showing how to use it for the proofs of important kinematical theorems. 
If additional names beyond KELVIN's aretobe attached to Eq. (28.1), they should be those 
of AMPERE and HANKEL. 
V. Vector fields. 
a) Vector lines, sheets, and tubes. 
29. Definitions. A vector line of a given vector field c is a curve everywhere 
tangent to c. Parametrie equations of a vector line are the solutions x" = x" (u) 
of the differential system 
or 
dU d.c XC =0, l !!;~" cml = 0. 
(29.1) 
If c is continuous in a closed region, 
there exists at least one vector line 
through each interior point of the Fig. 2. Vector tube and cross·sections. 
region; if c also satisfies a Lipschitz condition 2, there is exactly one 
through each point where c =f= 0. 
A surface everywhere tangent to c is a vector sheet of c. Such surfaces f (~) = 
const are non-constant solutions of 
c · gradf = 0, or ,. of 
c oxk =0. (29.2) 
Equivalently, a parametric representation x =X (u, v) of a vector sheet satisfies 
o.c o:JJ o.c o.c C·a;-Xav=O, -0u-Xav=f=O. (29.3) 
A vector line can always be represented locally as the intersection of two vector 
sheets. Consider a field c possessing a unique vector line through each point of 
a region r, and let c be a curve which is not a vector line of c; then, locally, the 
surface swept out by the vector lines intersecting c define a unique vector sheet 
of c associated with c. When c is a circuit, this vector sheet is called a vector 
tube of c. 
Let 6 be a vector tube of c, bounded by two simple circuits c1 and c2 , each 
embracing the tube once. Let 61 and 62 be two surfaces whose complete boundaries 
are c1 and c2 respectively (Fig. 2); when the unit normals to 61 and 6 2 are given 
senses so as to subtend an acute angle with c, d1 and 62 are cross-sections of the 
tube. Assuming c is integrable on the cross-sections 61 and 6 2 , we call its flux 
through them the strengths of the vector tubes at these cross-sections. Letting 
63 = d + 61 + 62 , we have 
~da· c = J da· c + J da· c, (29.4) 
•• ., •• 1 Cf. TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 8}. 2 See e.g. KAMKE [1930, 1, §§ 15, 16] for proof of uniqueness under weaker·conditions. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 52 
818 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 30. 
since da· c =0 on ~. In Eq. (29.4), the normals to 1 and 2 are both taken outward. If c is directed inward relative to d on :1 1 and we take the unit normal on :11 
tobe directed inward, we have 
~da· c = J da· c- J da· c. (29.5) da d:a d1 
Hence the flux of c out of a surface consisting of a vector tube of c and two crosssections equals the ditference between the strengths of the tube at these cross-sections. 
Let v be the region bounded by :13 • Assuming sufficient smoothness for GREEN' s 
transformation (26.1) to hold, from (29.5) we have 
fdivcdv = J da ·C-J da· c. (29.6) V 62 61 
H ence the total divergence of the field c in a region bounded by a vector tube of c and 
two cross-sections equals the ditference between the strengths of the tube at these crosssections. 
The above definitions may be extended to n-dimensional spaces which need not possess 
a metric tensor. lf c is any relative or absolute contravariant vector, the vector lines of c 
are the curves obtained as solutions of Eq. (29.1) 2 • As before, in a closed region where c 
satisfies a Lipschitz condition there exists a unique vector line through each interior point 
at which c =1= o. The vector lines intersecting an rn -1-dimensional surface c, when 1 < rn< n, 
then sweep out an rn-dimensional vector sheet d of c, this being defined as an rn-dimensional 
surface given parametrically by xk= xk(ul, ... , um), where 
();x[k ox' --···--c•l-o 8u1 aum - ' (29.7) 
or, equivalently, as the set of points satisfying fa (::~:) = const, a = 1, ... , n-rn, where the 
f's are functionally independent solutions of Eq. (29.2) 2 • lf c be closed, 6 is called a vector 
tube of c. For an n-dimensional vector tube of a relative vector of weight one, generalizations of Eqs. (29.4) and (29.5) are immediate, and a generalization of Eq. (29.6) is obtained 
by setting tr ... s=ck Ekr ... s in (27.2). 
30. Invariants of vector lines. Consider a region in which the magnitude c 
of a vector field c is non-zero. Let t = cjc 'denote the unit tangent to the vector 
lines of c, and put 
Then 
Now 
so that 
A =t·curlt, D = divt. 
A = t · curl (cjc) = (tjc) · curl c = c- 2 c · curl c. 
grad c = grad (c t) = (grad c) t + c grad t, 
(30.1) 
(30.2) 
(30. 3) 
div c = t · grad c + c div t = ~; + c D, (30.4) 
curl c = grad c X t + c curl t, (30.5) 
where djdt denotes differentiation with respect to arc length along the vector 
line1 • 
For any unit vector e and any vector v, we have the identity 
v=ee·v-ex(exv), (30.6) 
so that 
curl c = t t · curl c - t X (t X curl c) . (30.7) 
1 Here and elsewhere, we denote by dfde the directional derivative in the direction of a 
unit vector e. 
Sect. 31. Solenoidal fields I: Integral properties. 819 
Using Eqs. (30.5) and (30.6) with e = t, v = grad c, we get 
txcurlc =tx(gradcxt) +ctxcurlt, } 
= grad c - t t · grad c + c t X curl t. (30.8) 
Introducing the unit principal normal n and binarmal b of the vector lines, we 
have 
grad = t t · grad + n n · grad + b b · grad, 
which enables us to rewrite Eq. (30.8) as 
t X curl c = n n · grad c + b b · grad c + c t X curl t, 
dc dc 
= n !in + b Tb + c t x curl t, 
dc dc = n dt + b Tb - c t · grad t, 
( dc ) dc 
=n dn- cx + bdb, 
where x is the curvature of the vector line. Hence 
dc ( dc) -tx(txcurlc)=libn + cx -!in b. 
(30.9) 
(30.10) 
(30.11) 
From Eqs. (30.2), (30.7), and (30.11) we then obtain an intrinsic relation for 1 
curl c: 
dc ( dc) curl c = c A t +Tb n + c x - dn b. (30.12) 
The special case c = 1 yields 
curl t = A t + x b. (30.13) 
Following LEVI-CIVITA 2, we call theinvariant A the abnormality of the field, 
this name being suggested by the following geometric interpretation, attributed 
to BERTRAND by LECORNU 3. 
Consider any regular surface with unit normal N such that N = t at some interior point P. 
On this surface, let d be any region containing P and bounded by a circuit c, reducible on 
the surface, and let s be the area of d. Then by KELVIN's transformation (28.1) 
s-1 ~da:· t = s-1 f N· curltda. {30.14) e • 
Reducing c to the point P, so that s --+0, N --+t, by using Eq. (30.2) we get 
Ajp = lims- ~da:·t S------)>0 c {30.15) 
lf there exists a congruence of surfaces with t as normal, we may take d to be a region on 
one of these, obtaining from Eq. (30.15) A = 0. Thus A may be regarded as a measure of 
the departure of c from the property of having anormal congruence of surfaces. 
b) Special classes of fields. 
31. Solenoidal fields 1: Integral properties. An integrable vector field c is 
called solenoidal provided its flux out of every reducible closed surface 6 in its 
1 MASOTTI [1927, 2]. Cf. BJ0RGUM [1951, 4, § 2.3], CoBURN [1952, 1, § 2]. GILBERT [1890, 2] (cf. also KLEITZ [1873, 3, §§ 2, 8, 40]) had given formulae for the gradient 
and divergence of a tensor in terms of the radii of curvature of the members of a triply orthogonal system. 
2 [1900, 1]. The names "torsion of the curve system" and "torsion of neighboring 
vector lines" have also been proposed; cf. BJ0RGUM [1951, 4, § 2.4]. 3 [1919, 1]. 
52* 
820 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 31. 
region of definition is zero. From Eq. (26.1) 2 follows Kelvin's 1 characterization: 
A continuously differentiable field c is solenoidal if and only if its divergence vanishes 
divc = o. (31.1) 
There is also the characterization oj Helmholtz 2 : A field c, continuously 
differentiable 3 in a closed region, is solenoidal if and only if the strength of every 
vector tube is the same at all cross sections. The necessity of this condition follows 
immediately from Eq. (29.6). If the strength of every vector tube is the same at 
all cross sections, by Eq. (29.5) it follows easily that Eq. (31.1) holds, hence 
that c is solenoidal. 
In Sects. 31 and 32 we assume c is a continuously differentiable solenoidal 
field. Then by Eq. (13.7) we calculate 
div (cp(K+Il) = c · gradp(K+I) = {p(K) c}; 
hence by Eq. (26.1) 2 we obtain 4 for the moments (25.5) of c 
C(KJ= f {p(Klc}dv =~da· cp(K+I) = ~dacnp(K+IJ. 
.. d d 
(31.2) 
(31. 3) 
Hence the moments of a solenot.dal field are determined by the boundary values of 
its normal projecrion cn. I f cn = 0 on ~, then all moments of c over the volume u 
bounded by ~ vant"sh. 
More generallys, 
div (c \V)= c · grad \V, (31.4) 
whence follows 
J c · grad \V d v = ~da· c \V = ~ da cn \V. (31. 5) .. d d 
Hence, if c and \V are continuously differentiable and c is solenoidal, then the total 
c · grad \V in a region u is determined by the boundary values of cn \V. I f cn = 0 
on ~. then the total c · grad \V in u is zero 6• 
1 [1851, 1, § 74]. 2 [1858, 1, § 2]. From the fact that the vorticity field is solenoidal, HELMHOLTZ [1858, 
1, § 2] concluded that "Es folgt hieraus auch, daß ein Wirbelfaden nirgends innerhalb der 
Flüssigkeit aufhören dürfe, sondern entweder ringförmig innerhalb der Flüssigkeit in sich 
zurücklaufen, oder bis an die Grenzen der Flüssigkeit reichen müsse. Denn wenn ein Wirbelfaden innerhalb der Flüssigkeit irgendwo endete, würde sich eine geschlossene Fläche construiren lassen, für welche das Integral f q cos {} dw nicht den Werth Kuli hätte". TRUESDELL 
[1954. 2, § 10] has noted that this statement is misleading and incomplete. It is not trivial 
to reformulate it as a theorem susceptible of rigorous proof. One point glossed over in HELMHOLTz's statement is the fact that a vector tube of a field continuously differentiable in a 
compact region need not approach the boundary, be closed, or end in the interior. For 
example, in the plane, it may be bounded by curves having as a common limit set a limit 
cycle. One can show that this particular situation cannot occur if the field be solenoidal. 
Cf. Sect. 32, footnote 1. 3 TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 10] remarks that it suffices to assume c continuous and piecewise continuously differentiable, but that the result need not hold for piecewise continuous 
fields. 
4 TRUESDELL [1949, 3], [1954, 2, § 10]. The case K=O was discussed by FöPPL 
[1897. 1, § 4]. 5 TRUESDELL [1951, 2, § 9] has remarked that the more general result is implied by an 
example due to KELVIN [1849, 1, § 7]. 6 Using KELvrN's transformation (28.1}, one can show that this result is equivalent to 
the lemma 1 of WEYL [1940, 2]. A special case is given by BERKER [1949, 5, Chap. III]. 
We follow TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 10]. 
Sect. 31. Solenoidal fields I: Integral properties. 821 
Setting b =C in Eq. (26.2) and employing Eq. (31.1), we obtain 
~ [da · c c p(K) - -i c2 da p(K)] l ~ = J [c {cp(K-l)}-! c2 grad p(K) + curl c X cp(K)] dv. 
" 
(31.6) 
The case when K = 0 is PoiNCARE's 1 identity 
~ [da· c c-! c2 da J = J curl c X c dv. (31.7) 6 " 
Recalling the convention of Sect. 24, we formulate conditions sufficient for 
the vanishing of the integral over il and conclude that if a field c which is continuously differentiable and solenoidal in a region v satisfies the boundary conditions 
then 
cn=O or ccn=o(p- 2) 
c2 = const or c2 = o (p- 2) 
J curlcxcdv = 0. 
" 
on il, } 
on il, 
Sufficient for Eq. (31.8) to hold are the simpler conditions 
c = 0 or c = o (p-1) on il. 
For K = 1, Eq. (31.6) becomes 
~ [da · c c p - -i c2 da p J = f [ c c - ! c2 1 + curl c x c p J d v. 
d " 
(31.8) 
(31.9) 
(31.10) 
(31.11) 
Contrading Eq. (31.11) yields an identity of LAMB and J. J. THOMSON 2 
! f c2 d v = ~ da · (! c2 p - c c · p) + f p · cur 1 c X c d v . (31. 12) V 6 V 
from which it follows that i/ a field c which is continuously differentiable and 
solenoidal in a region v satisfies the following conditions: 
1. c=O or c2 =o(p-3), p-ccn=o(p-2) on il, (31.13) 
2. Throughout v, curl c x c = 0; 
then c = 0 throughout v. 
Sufficient for (31.13) to hold are the simpler conditions 
c = 0 or c = o (p- ;) on il. 
The alterna ting part of Eq. (31.11) yields 3 
~ [da-cpxc +ic2 daxp] =fpx (curlcxc)dv, 
6 " 
(31.14) 
(31.15) 
(31.16) 
from which we conclude that if a field c which is continuously differentiable and 
solenoidal in a region v satisfies the boundary conditions 
cn = 0 and c = const or p X c cn = ö (p- 2), (31.17) 
then 
fpx (curlcxc) dv = 0. 
Sufficient for Eq. (31.17) to hold are the simpler conditions (31.15). 
1 [1893, 1, § 5]. See also TRUESDELL [1954, 2, §§ 10, 64]. 
(31.18) 
2 [1879, 1, § 136], [1932, 6, § 153]; [1883, 1, § 6]. Cf. also TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 10] 
for the results given in italics here. 3 PoiNCARE [1893. 1, § 115]. Cf. TRUESDELL [1954, 1, § 10]. 
822 J.L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 32. 
In Eq. (26.2), put K =1, b =p; then 
j[pc+cp-p-c1+(3c+curlcxp)p]dv } 
=~[da· (pc + cp)p- da (p · c)p] . 
• 
(31.19) 
Contracting this relation yields 
2fp·cdv =~da·cp , (31.20) " . while the alternating part is equivalent tol 
3 J pxcdv = J px (pxcurlc) dv -~ " . 
- ~ [(daxc) xp] xp . 
• 
(31.21) 
J.J. THOMSON 9 derived two similar integral formulae which, while not restricted to solenoidal fields, are of interest mainly in the solenoidal case. First, 
in Eq. (26.2) put K =0, b p, obtaining 
J(curlcxp+3c+pdivc)dv ) 
" = T [da· (cp +pc)- da (p. c)], 
= ~ [(daxc) xp- da· cp] . 
• 
Since div (cp) =p div c +c, application of Eq. (26.1h yields 
2 J cdv = J pxcurlcdv +~ (daxc) xp. " . . Second, if we integrate the identity 
curl (p2c) = p2curlc + 2pxc 
over v and then apply Eq. (26.1)s, we obtain 
2fpxcdv =-J p2 curlcdv + ~daxp c. ". ". . 
(31.22) 
(31.23) 
(31.24) 
(31.25) 
For the various integral theorems we have given here, the region need not be 
simply-connected. 
32. Solenoidal fields II: Differential properties. lf c is any continuously differentiahte field, there exists an infinite number of scalar functions m such that mc 
is solenoidal. To see this, one need only note that 
div (mc) = 0, (32.1) 
being a first order differential equation for m, with continuous coefficients, admits 
an infinite nurober of solutions. Since c and mc have the same vector lines, the 
vector lines of any continuously ditferentiable field c are also the vector lines of 
an infinite number of solenoidalfields 3• This result may mislead in seeming to 
imply that vector lines of solenoidal fields have no special properties. Distinctions can arise, for example, because of the fact that solutions m of Eq. (32.1) 
1 MUNK [1941, 1, p. 95]. 
2 [1883, 1, §§ 4- 5]. The second of these is usually presented in a non-invariant form; 
cf. e.g. LAMB [1932, 6, § 195], where it is asserted that an error in J. J. THOMSON's formula 
was corrected by WELSH. 3 APPELL [1897, 2, § 5]. 
Sect. 32. Solenoidal fields II: Differential properties. 823 
can possess singularities at points where c =0, even if c be analytic. For example, 
in the plane, one can show that an isolated point where c = 0 is never a spiral 
point for the vector lines of a solenoidal field c, whereas it can be if c is not 
solenoidal 1. 
Any continuously differentiable solenoidal vector field c may be represented 
locally in EULER's form 2 
c =gradFxgradG 
where F and G are scalar functions which satisfy 
C·gradF=O, C·gradG=O. 
(32.2) 
(32.3) 
The surfaces F = const and G = const are thus vector sheets of c. One of the 
functions, say F, may be taken as an arbitrary non-constant solution of Eq. (32.3); 
the other may be taken as the function given by 
G Jexc·dx =- e·gradF' (32.4) 
where e is an arb itrary continuous vector field such that e · grad F =!= 0, and where 
the path of integration lies on one of the surfaces F = const. 
Combining the results of the two foregoing paragraphs, we see that any continuously differentiable field may be represented locally in the form 
c =H gradFxgradG, (32.5) 
the surfaces F = const and G = const being vector sheets of c. In Eq. (32. 5), 
F and G may be chosen as arbitrary functionally independent solutions of 
Eq. (32.3), and the function H is then determined uniquely. If c is solenoidal, 
Eq. (32.5) yields 
d. o(H,F, G) 
0 = lVC = "( 1 2 3); u X, X, X (32.6) 
therefore H =H(F, G). From Eqs. (32.5) and (32.6) follows Euler's theorem on 
solenoidal jields 3: I f F and G are any independent functions such that the 
surfaces F = const and G = const are vector sheets of a continuously ditferentiable 
solenoidal field c, then c can be represented locally in the form 
c =H(F, G)gradFxgradG. (32.7) 
From Eq. (32.2) and the identity 
curl (F grad G + grad H) = grad F X grad G, (32.8) 
it follows that any continuously differentiahte solenoidal field c may be represented 
locally as the curl of a vector v, 
c = curlv, (32.9) 
the field v being indeterminate to within an additive gradient. Conversely, if Eq. (32.9) 
holds, div c =div curl v =04• 
1 In connection with HELMHOLTz's characterization (Sect. 31, footnote 2), many expositians assert that the vector lines of a solenoidal field cannot end in the interior. KELLOGG 
[ 1929, 1, Chap. II, § 6] has remarked that this is false. 2 [1770, 2, §§ 26, 49]. [1806, 1, § 142]. Derivations are given in works on vector analysis, e.g. BRAND [1947, 2, § 104, Chap. 3]. 3 [1757. 1, §§ 47-49]. 
' More generally, any analytic field v yields theinfinite sequence of solenoidal fields curlK v 
(K = 1, 2, .... ). For K~ 3 we have curlK v =- 172 currK-2v, whence follow volume integrals 
yielding currK-2v in terms of cur!Kv. Thesefacts were noted by RowLAND [1880, 1] and 
FABRI [1892, 3] who attempted a kinematical interpretation of cur!Kv. For the case 
K = 2, cf. BOGGIO-LERA [1887, 3]. 
824 J.L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
At points where c =!= o, Eq. (30.4) shows that div c = 0 if and only if 
dlogc = _ D 
dt ' 
which may be integrated along the vector lines of c to give 
c = c0 exp [- J D dt], 
Sect. 33. 
{32.10) 
{32.11) 
this characterization being due to BJ0RGUM1• It follows immediately that a non-zero solenoidal 
field is determined by its vector lines and by its magnitude at one point on each. By successive differentiation of (30.4), we conclude that if c and D are analytic functions of arc length 
on a given vector line, c vanishes at one point if and only if it vanishes all along the vector 
line through the point. 
33. Lamellar and complex-lamellar fields. Following BJ0RGUM2, we call any 
vector field proportional to a . . . field a complex - ... field, wherein any name 
may be inserted for . . . From results given in Sect. 32, an arbitrary continuously 
differentiable field may thus be called a complex-solenoidal field. 
A field c is lamellar 3 in a region provided 
~ d~ · c = ~ dJ!' c" = 0 (33-1) e e 
for any reducible circuit c in the region 4• It follows that a field c, continuous 
in a region v, is lamellar if and only if there exists a scalar P, called the potential 
of c, such that 
c =- gradP. (33.2) 
The potential is single-valued if v is simply connected, not so in generat if v is multiply-connected. A lamellar field is thus everywhere normal to the equipotential 
surfaces P = const. A complex-lamellar field, being by its definition representable 
in the form 
c = QgradP, (33-3) 
where Q is a scalar, also is normal to a family of surfaces. From KELVIN's transformation (28.1) it follows that a continuously ditlerentiable field c is lamellar if 
and only if 
curl c = 0, or 8crkfox"'1 = 0. (33.4) 
Similarly, a continuously ditlerentiable field c is complex-lamellar if and only if 
c. curl c = 0, or c[k oc,j ox"l = 0. (33-5) 
These results were established by KELVIN 5, a result equivalent to Eq. (33-5) 
having been obtained much earlier by EULER6• From (33-5h it follows that c 
is complex-lamellar if there exists a co-ordinate system in which 
(33 .6) 
A field c is plane if Eq. (33.6) holds in some reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate 
system, rotationally symmetric if Eq. (33.6) holds in cylindrical co-ordinates, x3 
l [1951, 4, § 3.1]. 2 [1951, 4]. The reader will not confuse this usage of "complex" with "complexvalued". 3 The names lamellar and complex-lamellar derive from KELVIN [1850, 1], [1851, 1, 
§§ 68-69, 75]. 4 WEYL [1940, 2] generalizes the definitions of lamellar and solenoidal field given here. 5 [1851, 1, § 75]. VELTMANN also discussed these fields [1870, 1, pp. 453-456]. For 
a modern proof that Eq. (33-5) is sufficient as well as necessary, see e.g. BRAND [1947, 2, 
§ 105]. Therepresentation c = Q grad P + grad F(Q, P) is discussed by CASTOLDI [1955, 5]. 6 [1770. 1, § 1]. 
Sect. 33. Lamellar and complex-lamellar fields. 825 
being the angle variable. It is essential that the covariant components of c be 
used in Eqs. {33.4) 2 and (33.5h. 
For any vector field c, any curve ;x; =J:(u) satisfying the equation 
(33.7) 
is orthogonal to the vector lines of c which it intersects. A theorem of CARATHEODORY 1 asserts that in a closed and bounded region where c is non-zero and 
satisfies a l ipschitz condition, c is complex-lamellar if and only if in every neighborhood of an arbitrary interior point ;x; there exist a point ;x;* such that no curve 
satisfying Eq. (33.7) foins ;x; to x*. If c is complex-lamellar, it follows from 
Eqs. (33.3) and (33.7) that ;x; and ;x;* may be joined by a solution of Eq. (33.7) 
if and only if they lie on the same surface P = const, from which the necessity 
of this condition follows. We omit the more complicated proof of sufficiency. 
With the exception of the definitions of plane and rotationally symmetric 
fields, all these results are easily extended to n-dimensional spaces which need 
not possess a metric tensor, c being taken to be a covariant field 2• Eqs. (3 3.1) to 
(33.3), (33.4) 2 , (33.5) 2 and (33.7) require no alteration, while Eq. (33.6) is tobe 
replaced by cl = f(xl, x2), c2 = g(xl, x2), Ca= ... = c,. = 0. (33.8) 
It is clear from Eq. (33·3) that the magnitude of a complex-lamellar field is 
in no way restricted by its vector lines. Indeed, it is immediate that a non-vanishing field is complex-lamellar if and only if its unit tangent is complex-lamellar. 
However, the condition that a field be lamellar is essentially different in that it 
connects the magnitude of the field with the geometric properties of its vector 
lines. 
In the three-dimensional case, it is easytorender the above remarks explicit. 
In the first place, either directly from Eq. {30.1h or by substitution in Eq. (33.5), 
or from Eq. (30.15), we conclude that a non-zero continuously ditferentiable field 
is complex-lamellar if and only if its abnormality A is zero. For a lamellar field, 
we have from Eq. (30.12) the much stronger necessary and sufficient conditions 
of BJ0RGUM 3 : (1) A =0 when c=j=O, (2) c is constant along the vector lines of the 
binormal field b, and (3) 
c = c0 exp J xdn, (33.9) 
the integration being performed on the vector lines of the principal normal n, 
which lie on the equipotential surfaces, as do those of b. It follows that, in a 
sufficiently small region, a lamellar field is determined by its vector lines and 
by its magnitude at a single point on each equipotential surface. 
When a field is complex-lamellar, its unit tangent t is the unit normal of the 
surfaces P = const. Hence the mean curvature K of those surfaces is given by 4 
K- d' t D d log c 1 d' ( ) =- lV =- =dt--c lVC. 33.10 
Therefore, if we are given a set of vector lines having a normal congruence, 
we may obtain all non-vanishing complex-lamellar fields having these vector 
1 [1909, 5]. 2 In situations to which CARATHEODORY's sufficiency condition has been applied, it is 
artificial and unnecessary to introduce a metric tensor. Cf. CARATHEODORY [1909, 5], ERICKSEN [1956, 1]. 
3 [1951. 4, § 3.4]. 4 Cf. e.g. BRAND [1947, 2, § 131]. The result is due to CHALLIS [1842, 1], whose derivation was criticized and corrected by TARDY [1850, 1]. The geometry of the surfaces P= 
const is studied by CALDONAZZO [1924, 1], [1925, 1] and PASTORI [1927, 2]. 
826 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 34. 
lines by prescribing the scalar field div c everywhere and the value of c at one 
point on each vector line. Also, for a non-vanishing complex-lamellar field, any 
two of the following three conditions imply the third1 : 
1. The normal surfaces are minimal surfaces. 
2. The field is solenoidal. 
3. The magnitude of the field is constant on each vector line. 
34. Screw fields. From Eq. (33-5), a field c is complex-lamellar if and only 
if it be normal to its curl. The opposite extreme is fumished by a screw field 2 , 
defined as being parallel to its curl: 
equivalently, 
cxcurlc = 0, curlc =j= o; 
k_o c[k,m] c - , c[k,m] =j= 0. 
(34.1) 
(34.2) 
In either of these equations covariant derivatives may be replaced by partial 
derivatives. It follows from Eqs. (30.12) and (34.1) 1 that c is a screw field if and 
only if 
curlc=Ac=j=O, (34-3) 
so the abnormality of a screw field c is the factor of proportionality between the curl 
and the field. Since c and curl c have the same vector lines when Eq. (34-3) 
holds, and since the abnormality depends only on the vector lines, we may replace 
c by curl c in Eq. (30.2), obtaining3 
A _2 l curl c · curl curl c =c C·cur C= . curl c · curl c 
If m is any scalar function suchthat mc is solenoidal (cf. Sect. 32), 
0 = divmc = div(~ curlc) = grad ~ · curlc =Ac· grad ~, 
(34.4) 
(34.5) 
so the surfaces mjA =const are vector sheets of c and of curl c. Conversely, if, 
for some scalar function f (x), the surfaces f = const are vector sheets of a screw 
field c, we may set m=fA, where A is the abnormality; reading Eq. (34.5) 
backwards, we obtain div mc = 0. These results constitute the following theorem 4 : 
For a twice continuously differentiahte screw field c, a necessary and sufficient 
1 A special case is due to CALDONAZZO [1924, 2, § 6]. We generalize an argument of 
PRIM [1948, 1, § 3], [1952, 1, Chap. V]. Cf. also CASTOLDI [1947, 5], BYUSHGENIS [1948, 2, 
§ 2.1]. 2 Much of the literature follows CrsOTTI [1923, 3] in calling these fields "Beltrami 
fields", after the researches of BELTRAMI [1889, 1], but in fact nearly all of BELTRAMI's 
results were included in the prior and more extensive work of GROMEKA [1881, 2]. BELTRAM! hirnself called them "helicoidal". We revert to the more descriptive term screw field 
introduced by CRAIG [1880, 2, p. 225]. [1880, 3, p. 276], [1881, 5, pp. 5-6], the first 
person to remark them. Earlier STOKES [1842, 2, p. 3] had concluded that Eq. (34.1h 
implies C=O, but later he realized his error (footnote 1, p. 3, 1880 reprint of [1842, 2]). 3 LECORNU [1919, 1]. If we set B ==I curl clfc, then c is a screw field if and only if 
B =A, the proof being immediate from Eq. (34.3); necessity was proved by APPELL [1921, 
1, § 763], sufficiency by CARSTOIU [1946, 4]. A differential system for a screw field is 
given as Eq. (35.4) below. Another follows by taking the curl of Eq. (34.3) and then eliminating A by Eq. (34.4) (BALLABH [1948, 3, § 4]), but a simpler one may be obtained by putting Eq. (34.4) into Eq. (34.3) directly. Other differential equations are derived by BJ0RGUM 
[1951, 4, Sect. 5], [1954, 7]. 4 TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 12]. This generalizes theorems of NEMENYI and PRIM [1949, 
6, Th. 1], BELTRAMI [1889, 1] (see also MORERA [1889, 2]), and GROMEKA [1881, 2, GI. 2, 
§ 9], the references being arranged in order of decreasing generality. 
Sect. 34. Screw fields. 827 
condition that the surfaces 
A (curl eh = _!<:url c) 2 = (curl c)3 = const mc1 mc2 mc3 
(34.6) m 
be vector sheets is that mc be solenoidal. It is true a fortiori that mfA is constant 
an each vector line of a screw field c if mc is solenoidall. Setting m = 1, we obtain 
the corollaries: The surfaces of constant abnormality of a screw field c are vector 
sheets if and only if div c = 0; the abnormality of a solenoidal screw field is constant 
along each vector line. Thus from the vector lines alone, without knowledge of 
the magnitude of the field, we can determine whether or not a screw field is 
solenoidal. More generally, by putting m = 1 in Eq. (34.5) we may derive 
c-1 div c = - ~o~! AI • (34.7) 
A relation between a screw field and its vector lines may be read off from 
Eq. (30.12). This relation results from that given in Sect. 33 for lamellar fields 
if we replace "A = 0" by "A =!=O" 2• Indeed, from Eqs. (30.4) and (34-3) follows 
c A = c0 A 0 exp (- J D dt). (34.8) 
BJ0RGUM 3 has shown that for a given screw field c, it is always possible to choose a 
co-ordinate systemsuchthat the x3-lines are the vector lines, g13 = 0, g23 = x1 g33 , and cg33 = 1. 
Conversely, in a Co-ordinate system such that g13 = 0 and g23 = x1 g33 , if a vector field c 
be tangent to the x3-lines and of magnitude c so adjusted that cg33 = 1, then c is a screw 
field. 
From Eqs. (34-3) and (34.4) we conclude that 
o < curl c · curl c = c · curl curl c, (34.9) 
so a screw field and the curl of its curl always intersect at an acute angle. If 
this angle is zero, curl c is also a screw field. I t follows from taking the curl 
of Eq. (34.3) that the curl of a screw field c is again a screw field if and only if the 
abnormality of c is uniform. Then c is solenoidal, and successive curls of c are 
screw fields having the same abnormality 4• 
In the case when A is uniform, that c is solenoidal follows alternatively as a corollary 
of the first corollary following Eq. (34.6). Hence taking the curl of Eq. (34.3) yields 
172 c +Ac= o. (34.10) 
This equation was derived by GROMEKA 5, who based upon it a theory of determining a screw 
field of constant abnormality from appropriate boundary conditions. The same problern 
has been taken up by BJORGUM and GoDAL 6 ; besides constructing many interesting examples, 
they have shown that such a field c can be represented in the form 
c = A gradH x e + eA2 H + e · gradgradH, (34.11) 
where e is a fixed unit vector and 172 H + A 2 H = o. 
For the many more known properties of screw fields, the reader is referred to the treatise 
of BJ0RGuM7, 
1 TRUESDELL [1954, 6, § 527] attributes to VAN TuYL the remark that this theorem is 
an immediate consequence of the fact that any two solenoidal vector fields with common 
vector lines are proportional along them. 2 BJ0RGUM [1951, 4, § 3-3]. 3 [1957. 4, § 5]. 
'NEMENYI and PRIM [1949. 6, Th. 3]. 5 [1881, 2, GI. 2, § 9]. Cf. also STEKLOFF [1908, 2, §§ 39-52], TRKAL [1919, 3], 
BALLABH [1940, 5, §§5-7]. 6 [1953, 3], [1958, 2]. Cf. also BJ0RGUM [1951, 4, § 6]. 
7 [1951, 7]. Cf. also TRUESDELL [1954, 2, §§ 12, 52]. 
828 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sects. 35. 36. 
In n-dimensional metric spaces, screw fields may be defined by Eq. (34.2). There is no 
immediate extension to spaces which are not metric since associated components do not 
exist. One natural generalization of Eq. (34.2) is obtained by requiring a covariant vector 
b and a contravariant vector c to satisfy 
C!b[kfaxmJ c" = o, ob[kfoxmJ =!= o. (34.12) 
Suchpairs of vectors occur in studies on relativity1 • 
c) Potentials. 
35. MoNGE's potentials. If c be a twice continuously differentiable field, the 
field curl c, being solenoidal, has a representation of the form (32.2), namely, 
curlc = gradFxgradG, (3 5.1) 
from which follows curl(c-FgradG)=O. Thus c-FgradG is lamellar, so 
there exists a scalar H such that 
c =gradH +FgradG. (35.2) 
In general, this representation is valid only locally 2• The three scalarsF, G, and H, 
called Monge potentials 3 of c, are not uniquely determined, but in most 
applications there is no need to specify one particular set rather than another. 
From Eqs. (35.1) and (35.2) follows 
I o (H, F, G) ( 5 ) 
c·curc= 8 (xi,xz,x2)' 3-3 
whence, by Eq. (33-5), c is complex-lamellar .if and only if its three Monge potentials are functionally dependent. Directly from (35.1) we see that cislamellar 
if and only if the two potentials F and G are functionally dependent. 
MORERA 4 obtained differential equations to be satisfied by the Monge potentials of a 
screw field. In geometrical terms, these equations assert that for c to be a screw field the 
surfaces F=const and G=const, which by Eq. (35.1) are always vector sheets of curlc, 
must simultaneously be vector sheets of c. Formally, 
c · grad F = (grad H + F grad G) · grad F = 0, } 
c · grad G = (gradH + Fgrad G) · gradG = o. (3 5 .4) 
Conversely, if Eq. (35.4) hold and if F and G be functionally independent, then both c and 
curl c are perpendicular to grad F and to grad G; hence they are parallel, so c is a screw field. 
36. STOKEs' potentials. In a finite region v, an arbitrary vector field c has a 
representation of the form 5 
c = - grad S + curl v (36.1) 
and hence is the sum of a lamellar and a solenoidal field. Functions S and v 
satisfying Eq. (36.1) are called, respectively, a scalar potential and a vector potential of c; together, they are called the Stokes' potentials. An infinite 
nurober of potentials correspond to a given field c. Let c be piecewise differentiable 
in a finite region v, bounded by 6; within v, Iet c be continuous except upon a 
surface 6 ', on each side of which it has finite Iimits; then a pair of potentials for c 
1 E.g. VAN DANTZIG [1934,1, p. 646]. 2 Cf. HADAMARD [1903, 2, p. 80]. 3 This result was implied, but not stated explicitly, by MoNGE [1787, 1, §§XVI-XVIII, 
XX] and PFAFF [1818, 1, § 4]. The above derivation is due to HANKEL [1861, 1, § 11]. 4 [1889, 2]. See also BJ0RGUM [1951, 4, § 5.1]. 
STOKES [1851, 2, Part I, Sect. 1, §§ 3 -8]. Proofs are given in works on vector 
analysis, e.g. PHILLIPS [1933. 1, § 83]. Four stronger decomposition theorems are given by 
·WEYL [1940, 2]. Cf. also BLUMENTHAL [1905, 1]. 
Sect. 37. Definitionsand conditions of reality. 829 
is given by 
S = ~1-J 4n divc_dv d + ~1-J 4n da· d [c] __ - __ 4n 1 ___ ,f.. 'j" da:.!!_ d ' l .. 6' 6 
V = _1_! curl_!!_ dv + 1J_da x ~] __ 1_ ,f.. !-_a x~_ 
4n d 4n d 4n 'j" d ". .. " 
(36.2) 
where d is the distance from the point of integration to the point where S and v 
are being calculated, and where the bold-face bracket denotes the fump of c 
across 11', 
(36-3) 
c+ and c- being the limiting values of c on the two sides of 11' and the sense of 
da being fixed appropriately in terms of the choice of signs + and - for the two 
sides of 6'. In the case of a region extending to infinity in all directions, if c = 
ö (p-2) the formulae (36.2) still hold, providing the integrals over 6 be omitted. 
For suitably selected potentials, e.g., those given by Eqs. (36.2), the representation (36.1) is valid globally1 and v is solenoidal. We always assume the potentials are so selected. 
Since curlv is solenoidal, we may replace it in Eq. (36.1) by an expression of the form 
(32.2), so obtaining a local representation 
c = - grad S + gradF X grad G. 
VI. Tensors of order two. 
a) Proper numbers and vectors. 
(36.4) 
37. Definitionsand conditions of reality. A proper number a of a second order 
tensor a is a root of the equation 
(37.1) 
Since in n dimensions Eq. (37.1) is a polynomial equation of degree n in a, there 
are always n proper numbers, which need not be real or distinct. The left and 
right proper vectors of a corresponding to the proper number a are, respectively, the 
non-zero vectors m and q, in general complex, such that 
The directions of the vectors are the principal directions of a. 
A sulficient condition that alt proper numbers of a be real is that 2 
{ b is symmetric and positive definite 3 ,} 
a = b-1 • c, where 
c is symmetric. 
Inded, if a be so expressible, its proper numbers are given by 
1 HADAMARD [1903, 2, p. 80]. 
(37.2) 
(37-3) 
2 An alternative statement is: For some choice of the metric tensor (viz. gkm=bkm), 
a is symmetric. In general, such a metric is not Euclidean. 3 Throughout this work we write "the tensor b is positive definite" in place of "the 
components bkm are cocfficients of a positive definite quadratic form". 
8)0 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 37. 
the assertion then follows because each root a of an equation ofthistype is real 1 • 
Furtherroore, if the roots of Eq. (37.4) are a1 , ... , a,., there exist reallinearly 
independent vectors q1 , •.• , q,. such that 
(37.5) 
whence follows -1 
a"',.q~ = b"'' c,,.q~ = abq';, (3 7.6) 
so qb is a right proper vector of a corresponding to the proper nurober ab. Defining the vector mb by ~,.=b,.. qb, froro Eq. (37.5) we get 
-1 
a", ~" = b"• c., bku qb = a4 b,. qg =ab mb,, (3 7.7) 
so mb is a left proper vector of a corresponding to the proper nurober ab. 
Were the above condition also necessary, then all proper nurobers' being real 
would ensure the existence of n linearly independent right proper vectors. A 
counter-exarople is shown by the roatrix 
0 0 0 
1 0 0 ' 
0 0 1 
(3 7.8) 
which has the real proper nurobers 0, 0, 1, but only two linearly independent 
right proper vectors 2, e.g. (0, 1, 0) and (0, 0, 1). A necessary condition follows: 
If the proper numbers a1 , ... , a,. of a are all real, and if there exist corresponding 
right proper vectors q1 , ... , q,. forming a linearly independent set 3, then Eq. (37.3) 
holds. To show this, we first note that without loss of generality the qb roay be 
assuroed real. Since they are linearly independent, there exists a unique real 
reciprocal set me such that 
If we set 
.. me,.q~ = t5eb• L: mb,.q~ = t5k. 
b=l 
.. b,.,- L: ~k ~, b=I 
then b is a syroroetric positive definite tensor. Moreover, 
-1 
(37.9) 
(37.10) 
~" = b,.,q{,, q~ = b"'~,. (37.11) 
Since the q4 are right proper vectors of a, froro Eqs. (37.2) 2 , (37.9) 2 , and (37.11) 2 
it follows that 
a~ = aP, t5k = at 
b=1 
~ mbk ql, = 
b=1 
f. ab mb,. q€ l .. -1 -1 
= L: mbk ab bf>' mb, = bf>' c,,., 
b=1 
(37.12) 
1 See e.g. CoURANT and HILBERT [1931, 2, p. 32). The proofthat the roots of Eq. (31.4)3 
are real is implicit in the work of CAUCHY [1828, 1], [1829, 1], who treated explicitly 
the case b,.,= d,.,, thereby showing that the proper numbers of a symmetric tensor are always 
real. HERMITE [1855, 1] extended CAUCHY's result to complex matrices, showing that the 
proper numbers of a Hermitian matrix are always real. · 2 TRUESDELL [1954, 2, § 22) attributes this example to WHAPLES and gives an example 
of a matrix having all its proper numbers real and all its proper vector proportional to a single 
vector. Those familiar with the theory of elementary divisorswill see easily that the number 
of linearly independent proper vectors equals the number of elementary divisors. 3 Sufficient for this is that the proper numbers all be distinct. 
Sect. 37. 
where we have set 
Definitions and conditions of reality. 
.. c,,. =Lab mb, mbk· 
b=l 
Since c,,.=c11 ,, Eq. (37.12) is the desired result. 
831 
(37.13) 
The tensors b and c are not uniquely determined by a. Given any admissible 
set of proper vectors qb, we can obtain an infinite number of different admissible 
sets by multiplying each vector qb by an arbitrary non-zero scalar factor. As is 
easily seen from Eqs. (37.8), (37.10), and (37.13), different sets generally will 
determine different tensors b and c. It follows from Eqs. (37-9) and (37.11) 
that b as defined by Eqs. (37.10) satisfies (37-5), whatever be the choice of the qb. 
From Eqs. (37.11) and (37-7) we conclude that the reciprocal set ofvectors me, 
defined by the condition (37-9), are in fact left proper vectors corresponding to 
the proper numbers ae. The intermediate formula (37.12)a is particularly important in that it expresses the tensor a uniquely in terms of its proper numbers, 
supposed real, and a set of its independent right proper vectors, supposed n in number, 
and left proper vectors so chosen as to form a reciprocal set. The invariance of this 
representation under possible different choices of the qe is immediate from 
Eq. (37-9). 
It can occur that the vectors qe are mutually orthogonal. If they are normalized so as tobe unit vectors, Eq. (37.10) implies that bkm=gkm• whence we 
conclude that a =a'. That is, if all proper numbers of a are real, and if a has 
n linearly independent mutually orthogonal proper vectors, then a is symmetric; 
this theorem is due in principle to KELVIN and TAIT1• The example (37.8), 
interpreted as being referred to reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, shows that 
the reality of all proper numbers and orthogonality of a maximal linearly independent set of right proper vectors is insufficient to imply a =a'. There must 
exist n orthogonal proper vectors, which is not the case for the example. 
Aside from the result of KELVIN and TAIT, there has been no need to introduce 
the metric tensor if a is taken as a mixed tensor, b and c as covariant tensors. 
For any field a(:r) such that Eq. (37-3) holds, it is possible to select a coordinate system such that at a given point P, the right proper vectors have the 
components <5~. Indeed, let the qb (:r) constitute any linearly independent set of 
right proper vectors, in any Co-ordinate system; then we need only select :r* = 
:r* (:r) such that at P we have 
8x*" 
qk (:r*) = --qm (:r) = 15" b 8xm b b· 
From Eq. (37-9) 2 it follows that me,.(:r*) =t:5ek at P. Hence 
From Eqs. (37.12) 2, (37.14), and (37.15), at P we derive 
k * _ 8 x* k 8 :>:5 u ) _ ~ 8 x* " 8 :>:5 
a ,(:r ) - 8x" ax*' a .(:r - LJ 8x" 8x*' mbs qb u ab, s l 
b=1 
" =Lab 6~t:5br· b=1 
(37.14) 
(37.15) 
(37.16) 
This equation asserts that in the co-ordinate system :r*, the matrixlla",ll assumes 
diagonal form with entries ab. Conversely, if there is a real, non-singular 
1 [1867, 1, § 183]. 
832 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 38. 
co-ordinate transformation which diagonalizes II a" mll at a point, then a = b-1 · c, 
" where band c are the tensors having at P the components !5,.m and 2; ab !5b,. !5bm• 
b=1 
respectively, in the system in which II a" mll is diagonal. Such a co-ordinate system, 
hereafter called a principal Co-ordinate system, need not be orthogonal, which 
means that lla"mll and lla,.mll need not be diagonalized by the transformation. 
Combining these results, we have the following characterization: A necessary 
and sulficient condition that a = b-1 · c, where b and c are symmetric and b is 
positive definite, is that at an arbitrarily selected point P, there exist a real nonsingular co-ordinate transformation which diagonalizes the matrix II a" mll· In the 
langnage of matrices, this result may be restated as follows: A necessary and 
sutficient condition that a = b-1 • c, where b and c are symmetric and b is positive 
definite, is that a be ·similar to a diagonal matrix modulo the real matrices, i.e. 
that a =I· d ·l-1, where I is real and non-singular, d real and diagonal. A 
restaterneut of the theorems of CAUCHY and KELVIN and TAIT is: I may be taken 
as orthogonal, i.e.f' = 1-1, if and only if a = a'. 
In a principal co-ordinate system we have 
m 0 ak m + { m} { k m) { d} { } ak ,P = oxP kp ak - am unsumme ; 37.17 
when k = m, the second term vanishes. In general, this formula holds only at 
the point where the principal co-ordinate system is defined, and only for the 
diagonal mixed components do covariant derivatives reduce to ordinary partial 
derivatives. Even if lla"mll and llakmll also be diagonal matrices, we have a"",p=l= 
oa""foxP and akk,P =!= oakkfoxP, in general. When the principal CO-ordinate system 
is rea~ and orthogonal, Eq. {37.17) may be read in terms of physical components: 
a<km,P) = _fJ_ a<km) + f) log Vgmm (a<"">- a<mm>)' (37.18} OSp OS_. 
where we have used Eq. (25.6). 
For the case of most interest here, namely n =3, we may make use of the 
obvious but useful fact that the number of real proper vectors is fixed by the 
sign of the discriminant of the left member of Eq. (37.1}. We may use also the 
fact that the proper numbers of a are all real if and only if the same be true of 
a+m 1, where m is any scalar, as follows immediately from Eq. (37.1}. If a 
admits the decomposition {37-3), we have a+m1 = b-1 • (c+mb) as a corresponding decomposition for a +m1. 
FROBENIUS 1 showed that a has a proper number which is real, positive, simple, and 
greater in absolute value than any other proper number provided, for some choice of Coordinates, the numbers akm be all positive. 
BANG 2 noted that in three dimensions the proper numbers of a are all real if, in some 
co-ordinate system, a 12 a 23 a31 = a\ a32 a13 and a12 a 23/ a 13 , a23 a31f a21 , and a\ a12f a32 are of 
the same sign. 
38. Principal and related invariants. The K-th principal invariant I~KJ of a 
second order tensor a is the K-th elementary symmetric function of the proper 
numbers of a, 
(38.1) 
so that 
(38.2) 
1 [1908, 1]. 2 [1893, 3]. MuiR [1896, 2] extended BANG's result to n dimensions. 
Sect. 38. Principal and related invariants. 833 
Therefore the principal invariants determine the proper numbers uniquely up 
to order. When the proper numbers are real, unique determination is effected 
by the order convention ~~ a2 ;;::: • • • ~ a,., so that, lor values ol the J~K) such 
that all roots ol Eq. (38.2) are real, any single-valued lunction ol proper numbers 
equals a single-valued lunction ol principal invariants. Comparison of Eq. (38.2) 
with Eq. (37.1) shows that J~KJ is the sum of the principal K-rowed minors of 
the matrix lla"mll: 
I (K)=_1_s.•l···'K am1 amx a K! umJ ..• mg r1 • • • •x • (38.3) 
F or a real tensor a such that there is a real non-singular co-ordinate translormation which diagonalizes lla"mll, any single-valued absolute scalar invariant l(a) under 
arbitrary co-ordinate translormations is expressible as a single-valued lunction 
ol principal invariants1• For proof, we evaluate I in a principal co-ordinate system; 
by Eq. (37.16), I is a function of the ab, which are real; the assertion follows 
by the italicized statement in the paragraph preceding. Q.E.D. 
This result does not extend to an arbitrary second order tensor a, it being necessary to 
adjoin to the principal invariants WEvR's 2 characteristics of a to obtain a complete set. If a can be diagonalized, the WEYR characteristics of a are uniquely determined by the principal 
invariants. It is true that if f is a scalar polynomial in the a"m• then it is always expressible 
as a polynomial in the principal invariants 3 • The WEYR characteristics are not such polynomials; in fact they are not even continuous functions of a at a = o. Of more interest in 
mechanics are corresponding results for scalar invariants of both akm and Ckm under arbitrary 
co-ordinate transformations, or of a8 m under orthogonal transformations. 
The K-th moment I~K) of a is the sum of K-th powers of the proper numbers 
of a: .. -
1cK)- ~ (a )K _ am1 ams amx a = LJ b - ms m1 · · · m1 · (38.4) 
b=l 
If we set 
(38.5) 
.. where the sum runs over all sets of n non-negative integers Mb such that ~ Mb= L, .. b=l 
~ b Mb = K, then an expression for the moments I~K) in terms of the principal 
b=l 
invariants J~Kl is" 
K 
J(K) =K "_L u(K,L) a L.J L Yla • 
L~l 
(38.6) 
Except where otherwise noted, we henceforth assume n = 3 and write 5 Ia, 
Ha, lila, la, IIa, lila in place of J~>, II!:>, I!:>, I~>, 1!:1, 1!:1, respectively. In 
this notation, a is a proper number of a if and only if 
a3 - Ia a2 + IIa a - lila = 0; 
in particular, a = 1 is a proper number if and only if 
la - Ha + lila = 1 . 
(38.7) 
(38.8) 
1 For the symmetric case, RANKINE [1856, 2, § 3] refers to this result as a discovery of 
CAYLEY. 2 [1885, 1] and [1890, 1]. See also MAcDuFFEE [1933, 2, § 40]. 3 For n = 3 this follows immediately from a result due to WEITZENBÖCK [1923, I, 
pp. 65-66]. See also TRUESDELL [1952, 2, p. 132], [1953. 4, p. 594]. 4 BURNSIDE and PANTON [1901, 5, § 159] attribute this result to WARING. 5 In a space whose co-ordinates are Ia, lla, IIIa, BoRDONI [1955. 4] discusses the 
surface where the discriminant of (38.7) is constant. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 53 
834 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
From Eq. (38.6) we have 
Ha = I! - 2 Ha, 
2 IIa = I! - IIa, 
IIIa = I! - 3 Ia IIa + 3 IIIa, ) 
IIIa =t I!--! Ia IIa+ i IIIa. 
The inverse of a, which exists when IIIa =j= 0, is given explicitly by 
IIIa a-1 = a 2 - la a + IIa 1. 
The octahedral invariant! Ua is defined by 
Ua- L [j (ab- ac)J2 = i (Ila- IIa),) 
b<c 
= t (Ia 2 - 3 IIa) = ± (3 IIa- la 2) ; 
Sect. 38. 
(38.9) 
(38.10) 
(38.11) 
it satisfies the identity Ua+ml = Ua• for an arbitrary scalar m. The deviator 2 0a 
of a is its traceless part: 
(38.12) 
Hence a = 0a if and only if Ia = 0; moreover, 0a = 0 if and only if a is a scalar 
multiple of 1, or, as weshall sometimes say, if a is spherical. Foratobe spherical 
it is necessary and sufficient that it be symmetric and that all its proper numbers be equal. We note also that 
I10a = IIa - i I!. (3 8.13) 
From Eqs. (38.12) and (38.11) follows 
(38.14) 
When the proper numbers of a are real, we have Ua ~ 0 and IIa ~ 0 with 
equality holding in the former case if and only if all proper numbers be equal; 
in the latter, if and only if all be zero. The quantity (II 0 )1 is the intensity of a. 
For symmetric 3 a, the intensity vanishes if and only if a vanishes, whence it follows 
from Eq. (38.13) that Ua vanishes if and only if a be spherical. 
From Eq. (3.3) we find that the squared magnitude of the cross of a is given 
by4 
ja! = II.a - IIa = - II,a + I! - 2 II,a, 
= 2 (Ha- II,a), 
where .a==t(a+a'). 
We have 5 
~Ia_- oak,. - ~r k• ~Ia_ oakm =I a bkm- amk ' iJakm olla -
- 2am k• l 
illlla m r I m + II ~m III -lm iJIIIa m r iJakm- = a Ta k - a a k a Uk = a a k > ßak;;;- = 3 a r a k > 
(38.15) 
(3 8.16) 
1 The invariance and significance of Ua were known to MAXWELL in 1856 [1937. 10, 
pp. 32-38]; it was introduced by v. MISES [1913, 2, § 1]. The name "octahedral invariant" 
is usually attached to (2/V3) ut on the basis of a geometrical interpretation given by NADAI 
and LODE [1933, 3, § II], [1937, 2, pp. 206-207]. 
2 KLEITZ [1873. 3, § 23] was the first to make an explicit study of the deviator. 
3 More generally, for any a that can be diagonalized by real transformations. 4 LIPSCHITZ [ 187 5. 1]; HAMEL [ 1936, 1, § 1]. 
5 For the symmetric case, these results are given by MuRNAGHAN [1937. 3, § 3], SIGNORINI [1943,1, § 17), and REINER [1945, 3, §4}. 
Sect, 39. Inequalities. 835 
where Eq. (38.16) 5 , which follows from Eq. (38.16) 4 by Eq. (38.10), holds only 
when u-1 exists. Also1, when u-1 exists, we have da= -a · da-1 · a and hence 
(38.17) 
39. Inequalities 2• CAUCHY 3 was first to establish bounds for the proper numbers 
of matrices. Let the proper numbers of a real symmetric three-dimensional 
matrix be ordered so that ~ ~ a3 • Then, if a be referred to a reetangular 
Cartesian co-ordinate system, CAUCHY's results are that a1 is never less than, 
while a3 is never greater than any one of the six quantities 
(k =f= m) (3 9.1) 
and that, for each k and m, a2 lies between the two numbers given by the expressions (39.1). Of course, one may interpret the components in (39.1) as physical 
components of a in an arbitrary orthogonal co-ordinate system. 
Let a be any second order tensor, real or complex, in n dimensions, set b == 
-! (a + a'), c =-! (a- a'), where the bar denotes the complex conjugate; select 
any proper number a of a, and write it in the form a =P +iq, where p and q are 
real. Refer a to any reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system and let A, B, and C 
be the maxima of the absolute values of the components of a, b, and c, respectively. We then have HrRSCH's inequalities 4 
[a[ ~nA, IPI ~nB, [q[ ~nC. (39.2) 
One corollary is HERMITE's theorem 5 : A sufficient condition that the proper numbers 
of a alt be real is that a be Hermitian, i.e. that c =0. Another is WEIERSTRAss' 
theorem 6 : A sufficient condition that the proper numbers of a alt be pure imaginary 
is that a be skew-Hermitian, i.e., that b =0. HrRSCH7 showed also that when b 
is real, q~ [!(n-1)]!C, and that, if the proper numbers of b, which in this case 
HERMITE's theorem shows to be real, be ordered so that ~ • • · ~ b,., then 
b 1 ~ p ~ b,.. When the proper numbers of the Hermitian tensor d = a . a' are 
similarly ordered, BROW~E's inequality 8 asserts that any proper number a of 
a satisfies dl~ a a~ d,.. 
We again restriet attention to the case when n = 3 and a is real. From 
Eq. (38.15) follows 
(39-3) 
the equality holding if and only if a be symmetric. Further inequalities follow 
from the observation that since complex proper numbers appear in conjugate 
pairs, all symmetric functions of them are real, so that an inequality may be 
inferred from every identity in which the square of such a function occurs. From 
(38.15) we thus obtain 
(39.4) 
1 SrGNORINI [1943, 1, § 17]. 
2 Further discussion of results in this section is given by MAcDUFFEE [1933, 2, § 18]. 
3 [1828, J], [1830, 1, Th. 1]; in [1829, 1, Th. 1] he extended the result to n dimensions. 
4 [1901, 2]. 5 [1855. 1]. For real a, this theorem was proved earlier by CAUCHY [1828, 1], 
[1829, 1]. 
s [1879. 2]. For real a, the theoremwas proved earlier by CLEBSCH [1863, 2]. 
7 [1901, 2]. For real a, the results are due to BENDIXSON [1901, 3]. 
8 [1928, 1, Th. V]. 
i3* 
J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 39. 
with equality holdingifand only if a be symmetric. From Eqs. (38.9h and (38.11) 
it follows that 
II0 ~- 2Il0 , 
From Eq. (38.13) we get 
II,a ~Ha. 
In all cases of Ineqs. (39.5) and (39.6), equality holds if and only if Ia =0. 
(3 9. 5) 
(39.6) 
When we add the condition that all proper numbers of a be real, as is the 
case when a is symmetric, from the fact that then IIa ~ 0 with equality holding 
if and only if a =0, a further sequence of inequalities may be inferred. From 
Eqs. (38.9) and (38.13) we thus get 
3 IIa ~ I! ~ 2 IIa, (39.7) 
where equality holds on the left if and only if a is spherical; on the right, if and 
only if a=O. From Eq. (38.11) follows 
(39.8) 
where equality holdingifand only if a =0. Also from Eq. (38.11), since Ua ~ 0, 
we derive 
I!~ 3 Ha, 
with equality holding if and only if a is spherical. 
When all proper numbers are non-negative_, we have obviously1 
, Ia ~ o, IIa ~ o, I! ~ 27 IIIa ~ o. 
(39.9) 
(39.10) 
For a real symmetric tensor referred to reetangular Cartesian Co-ordinates, 
from Eq. (38.4) 2 we see that 
(akm)2 ~ Ha • 
There is also HADAMARD's inequality 2 
(39.11) 
(39.12) 
If !Ia! ~ K and lila!~ K, Eq. (38.9h and Ineq. (39.11) imply that for a symmetric 
tensor we have 
(39.13) 
In Ineqs. (39.11) to (39.13), akm can be interpreted as a physical component of a 
in any orthogonal co-ordinate system. In any co-ordinate system, we have 
(39-14) 
where M is the maximum of the absolute values of the mixed components of a. 
Results of WEDDERBURN 3 imply for any two symmetric tensors a and b 
the inequalities 
(39.15) 
1 The third inequality, for the symmetric case, was given in more complicated form by 
SIGNORINI [1949, 7, Chap. II, § 5]. 2 [1893. 2], ScHUR [1909, 2] gives an extension of this inequality as well as several 
others. Cf. also MuiR [1930, 2, Chap. I(a)]. 3 [1925,E2]. 
Sects. 40, 41. Real powers of positive tensors. 837 
b) Powers and matrix polynomials. 
40. Integral powers. In this Part, the dimension of the underlying space is 
arbitrary. When K is an integer, the K-th power of a tensor a is defined inductively 
by1 
(40.1) 
where K is restricted to be positive when a has no inverse. It follows from 
Eq. (37.2) that 
(40.2) 
hence the K-th power of any proper number of a is a proper number of aK, and 
every right (left) proper vector of a is a right (left) proper vector of aK. To obtain 
a sharper result, we note the following identities, valid for any scalar m and any 
tensor a: 
when K> 0, 
aK- m 1 = (a-1 - m1 1) ... (a-1 - mK 1) when K < 0, 
(40.3) 
(40.4) 
where m1 , ... , mK are the I Kl complex I Kl-th roots of m. Taking the determinant of both sides of Eqs. (40.3) and (40.4) shows that m isaproper number of 
aK if and only ij at least one IKI-th root of m isaproper number 2 of a when K >O, 
or of a-1 when K < 0. The proper numbers of a-1 are the reciprocals 3 of those 
of a. 
It can occur for some K that there exist proper vectors of aK which are not 
proper vectors of a. E.g., if II aKmll = II ~ _ ~ II, then a 2 = 1, so that an arbitrary 
vector is a proper vector of a 2, while the only right proper vectors of a are (b, 0) 
and (0, c). 
By the Hamilton-Cayley theorem, we may replace (ab)K by aK in Eq. (38.2), 
obtaining 
(40.5) 
This formula makes it possible to write any power of a as a linear combination of 
1, a, ... , an-I, with scalar coefficients that are polynomials in the principal invariants ij the power is positive, rational functions if it is negative. For positive K, 
RANUM 4 gave the formula 
N 
an+K = L: H~K,L) a{L)' L~1 
where H~K,L) is defined by Eq. (38.5), and where 
n-L 
a{L)= L (-1t-Q+l I~n-Q)aQ+L-1. 
Q~O 
(40.6) 
(40.7) 
41. Real powers of positive tensors. We call a tensor akm positive when its 
proper numbers arereal and positive and it possesses n linearly independentproper 
vectors. In particular, a positive definite (symmetric) tensor is positive. For 
a positive tensor we have the representation (37.12h: 
n 
a's = L ab q(, mbs' b~I 
1 STICKELBURGER [1881, 4] was first to define general powers of matrices. 2 BoRCHARDT [1846, 1], [1847, 1], when K>o. 
(41.1) 
3 This was known to SPOTTISWOODE [1856, 1]; the result then follows for all K=J= o. 4 [1911, 1]. 
838 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 42. 
where ab> 0 and where the qb and mb are reciprocal sets of right and left proper 
vectors. For any real K, the K-th power of a positive tensor a is defined to be 
K 
the positive tensor aK whose components a~ are given by 
(41.2) 
wherein (ab)K is the positive real K-th power of ab. That is, aK is the unique 
tensor having the sameproper vectors as a and having as its proper numbers the 
positive K-th powers of the proper numbers of a. This definition is equivalent 
to Eq. ( 40.1) when both are applicable. The usuallaws of exponents apply to aK 
as defined by Eq. (41.2). For example, by Eq. (37.9) 1 we obtain 
n n 
L;(ab)K+Lqf,mbs= L (ao)Kq{,mbu(a,)Lq~mcs, (41.3) 
b=l ~c=l 
so that aK+L =aK. aL. 
For a non-negative tensor, i.e., a tensor having n linearly independent proper 
vectors and real proper numbers which are positive or zero1, Eq. (41.2) serves 
to define a unique K-th power when K~ 0. 
If we accept the possibility that aK may be complex and multivalued, by using different 
determinations of the K-th powers of the several proper numbers in Eq. (41.2) we may define 
various K-th powers of any matrix having a representation of the form (41.1). Such a definition is unsatisfactory in two respects. First, once one admits the possibility that aK be 
multivalued, it seems preferable that al/M should represent any solution x of 
xM=a (41.4) 
when M is an integer, whereas the definition just mentioned excludes some solutions. Second, 
there is little or no motivation for excluding tensors not representable in the form ( 41.1). 
A more satisfactory definition of aK is easily obtained by regarding it as a complex multivalued function of a in the sense of CrPOLLA2 . We omit the details, as the definitions already 
given are adequate for this appendix. Several writers, beginning with CA YLEY 3, have studied 
the solution of Eq. (41.4). 
42. Matrix functions. A matrix b given by 
(42.1) 
where the cGi are scalar constants, is a matrix polynomial in the variable matrix a. 
Matrix polynomials may be set into one-to-one correspondence with the polynomials in a scalar variable x which are defined by the same set of constants, 
and the algebra of matrix polynomials is isomorphic to the algebra of polynomials 
in a scalar indeterminate. 
Similarly, an infinite set of constants c<» defines a formal matrix power series 
in a, corresponding to the formal scalar power series b (x) determined by the same 
coefficients. The matrix power series thus obtained converges if and only if every 
proper number of a lies inside or on the circle of convergence of the scalar series 
1 For real tensors, this is a slight generalization of the usual definition of non-negative 
tensors or linear transformations. See e.g. HALMOS [1942, J, §56]. 2 [1932, 2]. See also MAcDUFFEE [1933, 2, §SO]. 3 [1858, 2], [1872, 1]. WEITZENBÖCK [1932, 3] gave a method for determining all 
solutions. AuTONNE [1902, 1], [1903, 1] showed that in the complex field, if a is nonnegative and Hermitian, then there is a unique solution which is non-negative and Hermitian. 
A similar analysis shows that if a is non-negative according to the definition given above, 
then there is a unique solution which is non-negative. For further references, see MAcDuFFEE 
[1933. 2, §§ 48, SO] and WEDDERBURN [1934. 2, p. 171]. 
Sect. 42. Matrix functions. 839 
b (x) and, for every proper number a of multiplicity m, the power series for the formal 
m -1st derivative b(m-1) (a) converges 1• 
Each proper number of a matrix polynomial b (a) is a function of a single 
proper number of a, as follows from a more general and more explicit theorem 
of FROBENIUS: Let r(x, ... , y) =P(x, ... , y)fq(x, ... , y) be a rational function 
of the scalar indeterminates x, ... , y, p and q being polynomials; let a, ... , b be 
commutative matrices such that the matrix q (a, ... , b) is non-singular; then the 
proper numbers ab, ... , bn of a, ... , b can be ordered so that r (a1 , ... , b1), ... , 
r(a,., ... , b,.) are the proper numbers of r=p(a, ... , b) · q-1 (a, ... , b) =q-1 · p, 
the ordering being the same for all rational /unctions 2• Loosely related to this is 
SYLVESTER's assertion that, whether or not a and b commute, the proper numbers 
of a · b and b · a coincide 3• 
RANUM's equation (40.6) serves to reduce any matrix polynomial or power 
series to the form 
(42.2) 
where the coefficients d(J) are, respectively, polynomials or power series 4 in the 
principal invariants of a. There are many functions representable in this form 
that are neither matrix polynomials nor matrixpower series: for example, b (a) = 
n1l 1. Any function of the form (42.2) satisfies 
b (I· a · 1-1) = 1 · b (a) · r, (42.3) 
where I is an arbitrary non-singular matrix. Conversely, if each component of b 
be a polynomial in the components of a and if b (a) satisfy Eq. (42.3) for arbitrary 
non-singular I, then b is representable 6 in the form (42.2) with coefficients d(J) 
which are polynomials in the principal invariants of a. DIRAC6 proposed Eq. (42.3), 
with a, b, and I interpreted as elements of any algebra 7, as a part of the definition of b's being a function of a. He noted that Eq. (42.3) implies that I commutes with b whenever I commutes with a. TURNBULL and AITKEN8 showed 
that if a and b are complex n x n matrices and if b commutes with every complex 
matrix that commutes with a, then b is expressible as a linear combination of 
1, a, ... , a"- 1. An analogaus result for matrices over the real field is readily 
established. Consequently Eq. (42.3) implies that b is a linear combination of 
1, a, ... , a"- 1 with coefficients depending on a in such a way as to be scalars 
under arbitrary symmetry transformations. Under reasonably general conditions, these scalar coefficients are expressible as functions of the principal 
invariants of a, as follows from the theorems given at the beginning of Sect. 38. 
1 HENSEL [1926, 1]. WEYR [1887, 2] had previously treated the case where no 
proper number of a lies on the circle of convergence. PHILLIPS [1919, 2] gave sufficient 
conditions for the convergence of a matrixpower series in any finite set of commuting matrices. 
2 According to MACDUFFER [1933, 2, p. 23], BROMWICH [1901, 4] noted that this 
theorem may fail to hold when r (x, ... , y) is .not rational. We find no explicit statement 
to this effect in BROMWICH's paper, though it may follow from results given in his § 3. 
3 SYLVESTER [ 1883, 2] stated this without proof. MACDUFFER [ 1933, 2, p. 23] gives an 
elegant proof. 
4 Expressions of the type (42.2) are sometimes called "polynomials in a" even when 
the d!Jj arenot polynomials in a. See e.g. MAcDUFFER [1933. 2, Th. 15.3] 
5 For the case n = 3, this follows immediately from a theorem of WEITZENBÖCK [ 1923, 
1, pp. 65-66]. The result for arbitrary n can be established similarly. 
6 [1926, 2]. 
7 The elements of some, but not all algebras are representable by square matrices of finite 
order. 8 [1932, 5, p. 150]. 
840 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 43. 
Various writers1 have considered the problern of inverting a matrix polynomial 
to obtain a in terms of b. Theinverse a(b), when it exists 2, is in general complex 
and multivalued. It can be shown that for arbitrary non-singular I we have 
{42.4) 
this being interpreted in the sense that for given I each value of a (b) is equal 
to some value of 1-1 • [a(l · b · l-1)] ·I· 
Contrary to what might be expected from the results of WEITZENBÖCK and of TuRNBULL 
and AITKEN concerning Eq. (42.3). in general there are values of a(b) which arenot expressible as linear combinations of 1, ... , bn--1 ; values, that is which cannot be regarded as 
matrix polynomials or power series. Recognizing this, algebraists have attempted to devise 
more general definitions of matrix functions 3 to include such possibilities, still insisting upon 
a correspondence between matrix functions and functions of a single scalar variable. According to these definitions, a matrix function x(a) always satisfies Eq. (42.3). this being interpreted as was Eq. (42.4) in cases where b (a) is multivalued. Such definitions are not easily 
generalized to the case of matrices depending on several matrices. 
The reader who has even slight familiarity with recent development in continuum mechanics will see that here we have come up against a central problern 
in modern theories of materials. We now formulate lunctional delinitions 
which seem particularly weil suited for application in classical mechanics, if 
perhaps not so well for other fields: 
1. If each component of the matrix b be a function of the components of the 
matrices a, ... , c, we say that b is a matrix function of a, ... , c. 
2. A matrix function b (a, ... , c) such that 
b(o · a · o-1, ... , o · c · o-1) =o · b(a, ... , c) · o-1 (42.5) 
for all orthogonal matrices o, i.e., for all o such that 
o-1 = o', {42.6) 
is an isotropic 4 matrix function of a, ... , c. 
3. If each component of the matrix function b (a, ... , c) be a polynomial in 
the components of a, ... , c, then b (a, ... , c) is a polynomial matrix function of 
a, ... , c. 
4. An isotropic polynomial matrix function is one satisfying both 2 and 3. 
c) Decompositions. 
43. Invariant decompositions. The group of transformations of reetangular 
Cartesian co-ordinate systems decomposes the linear vector space of second order 
tensors into three linear subspaces, the tensors comprising these spaces being, 
respectively, the spherical tensors, the symmetric traceless tensors, and the skewsymmetric tensors. Any orthogonal transformation maps each subspace onto 
itself; the only tensor common to two of them is the zero tensor; none possesses 
a proper linear subspace mapped into itself by every orthogonal transformation. 
In modern terminology, these three are the irreducible invariant subspaces of 
1 Cf. MAcDuFFEE [1933, 2, §§ 47, 48] for references. RuTHERFORD [1932, 4] gives 
certain rather explicit solutions for a fairly general class of equations. MAcDuFFEE [1933, 
2, p. 94] indicates how all solutions can be obtained in the case when b is spherical. 
2 WEITZENBÖCK [ 1932, 3, p. 161] gives a simple example of a case where no inverse 
exists for the equation b =a2 • 
3 Cf. MAcDuFFEE [1933, 2, §SO] for references. 4 The terminology agrees with that used by RIVLIN and ERICKSEN [1954, 5, § 21]. 
Sect. 43. Invariant decompositions. 841 
the space of tensors or order two with respect to the orthogonal group1• Explicitly, we have the decomposition 
- -1 J(1) + [ - -1 J(1) ] + a,.".- n a g,.". a(km) n a gkm a[km] • (43 .1) 
which is, in the sense indicated above, maximal. 
An arbitrary matrix a can be written in infinitely many ways as the product 
of two symmetric matrices, one of which is non-singular2. This can be formulated 
in the following two ways: 
a" ". = b"' c,m, 
a"". = d"' e,m, 
b[km]- c -0 det b""'=l= 0, -[km]- • 
d[km] = e[km] = 0, det e,..,. =!= 0. 
(43.2) 
(43-3) 
As is clear from the results at the beginning of Sect. 37, b cannot always be chosen 
tobe positive definite; the same applies to e. 
Any non-singular matrix a may be written in the forms 
a = s . o = o . s*, (43.4) 
where o is orthogonal, and s and s* are symmetric and positive definite 3 ; o, s, and 
s* are uniquely determined. We now give a proof ofthispolar decompositio'n 
theorem4• Since a · a' is a positive definite 5 symmetric tensor, by the results 
of Sect. 41, it has a unique positive square root s; since a is non-singular, so is s. 
Therefore we ma y set 
s= (a·a')i, o = s-1 - a. (43-5) 
Now s-1 • a. a'. s-1= 1, or (s-1 • a) · (s-1 • a)' = 1; therefore o is orthogonal. From 
Eq. (43.5) 2 follows Eq. (43.4)1 • In the same way we obtain a decomposition 
a = o* · s*, with 
s* = (a'. a)!, o* _ a-s-1 • (43.6) 
1 The corresponding decomposition of the space of tensors of any given order is derived 
and discussed in some detail by WEYL [1946, 3, Chap. VB], references to relevant literature 
being given on pp. 310-311. 2 FROBENIUS [1910, 1]. Voss [1878, 1, p. 343] previously established this for nonsingular a. HILTON [1914, 1] characterized the matrices which can be written as the product 
of two skew-symmetric matrices or as the product of a symmetric and a skew-symmetric 
matrix. 3 We need to interpret this theoremalso in terms of lineartransformations; equivalently, 
any second order tensor with non-vanishing determinant may be expressed as the product 
of a unique orthogonal tensor by a unique positive definite symmetric tensor. An orthogonal 
matrix was defined by Eq. (42.6). An orthogonal tensor ok". is defined by the property that 
under the transformation vk = okpvP, w"' = o"'pwP, for arbitrary vectors v and w, the inner 
product g,.".vkwm is invariant. That is, 
g,.".v"w"' = g,.". okp o"'qvPwq = g,.".v"w"'. (A) 
In order for this relation to hold for arbitrary v and w, o must satisfy 
(B) 
alternatively, o,."'o"p = IJp · 
In a reetangular Cartesian system, the matrix ok". is an orthogonal matrix. In general 
co-ordinates, (B) asserts that (g · o)' = (o · g-1tl, where g = II g,.".IJ. 
' An equivalent algebraic statement and all the essential ideas for an algebraic proof were 
given by FINGER [1892, 4, Eq. (25)]; the first algebraic proof, by E. and F. CosSERAT [1896. 3, 
§ 6] (cf. also BURGATTI [1914, 3], SIGNORINI [1930, 3]). The ideas of FINGERand the CosSERATS were put into matrix notation and extended to complex matrices by AuTONNE 
[1902, T9, Lemma II], hisform of the proof being that given above. If a is singular, decompositions a = s · o = o* · s* exist but are not unique; cf. HALM OS [ 1942, 1, § 67]. 
5 If we set w := v · a, then, since a is non-singular, w = 0 if and only if v = o. Since 
v · (a · a') · v =W • 1v, it follows that a · a' is positive definite. 
842 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 44. 
We shall show presently that both decompositions of a are unique. Since a = 
o . (o-1 . s . o), it is a consequence of this uniqueness that 
s* = o-1 · s · o, o*=o. (43 .7) 
To prove uniqueness1, we note that s · o = s' · o' implies o = s-1 · s' · o' and 
o' =o-1 = (o')-1. s'. s-1, or o = s · (s')-1 · o'. Hence (s-1 · s'- s · (s')-1) · o' =0, 
whence follows s-1 • s' =S. (s')-1, or s 2 = (s') 2 ; therefore, since s and s' are positive definite, we derive s = s', and hence o = o'. Q.E.D. By this uniqueness, 
it follows also that s and o commute if and only if s = s*; that is, if and only if 
a. a' =a'. a, in which case a is called normal 2• The dass of normal matrices 
includes all symmetric, skew-symmetric, or orthogonal matrices. 
lf a is non-singular, there exists a non-singular matrix b such that3 
a = b2 
and, if a is also symmetric, a matrix c such that 4 
a = c'·c. 
(43.8) 
(43.9) 
In Eqs. (43.8) and (43-9), b and c in general are complex and are not uniquely determined. 
44. Certain canonical forms. For any second order tensor a, there exists a 
co-ordinate transformation, which may be chosen to be unitary, reducing a at 
a given point to superdiagonal form 5 : 
a1 1 a12 ... a\ 
JJakmll = 0 a22 ... (44.1) 
0 0 ... ann 
When a is real and all its proper numbers are real, this transformation is real 
and may be chosen tobe orthogonal. When there are complex proper numbers, 
the transformation is necessarily complex. 
In three dimensions a real tensor field has either three real proper numbers 
or one real, two complex conjugate. In the latter case, there isareal transformation, which may be taken to be orthogonal, reducing a to the form 6 
a b c 
llakmll = - b d e (44.2) 
o o t 
When Eq. (44.1) holds in reetangular Cartesian co-ordinates, a is normal 
(Sect. 43) if and only if the matrix ( 44.1) is in fact diagonal. Hence a tensor 
all of whose proper numbers are real is normal if and only if it is symmetric. A 
tensor of the form (44.2) is normal if and only if c = e = 0, a = d. 
It is known7 that a real symmetric traceless matrix a can be transformed by 
orthogonal transformations to a system in which all diagonal components of a 
1 MURNAGHAN and WINTNER [1931, 5]. 2 MURNAGHAN and WINTNER [1931, 4], [1931, 5]. 
3 Cf. MACDUFFEE [1933, 2, §§ 35, 48]. 4 This follows immediately from the fami!iar result, used by LAGRANGE [1759, 1], that 
a quadratic form can be reduced to a sum of squares by linear transformations. 5 SCHUR [1909, 2]. 6 MURNAGHAN and WINTNER [1931, 4]. There is a generalization to n dimensions. 
7 LovE [1906, 1, § 16] stated this without proof. WHAPLES has shown us a proof and an 
extension of the theorem to matrices defined over essentially arbitrary fields. 
Sect. 44. Certain canonical forms. 843 
vanish. Now consider the matrix (43.1); in every co-ordinate system the diagonal 
components of 1 are all equal, those of the skew-symmetric part i (a- a') vanish, 
and the remaining tensor in the matrix (43.1) is symmetric and traceless, whence 
it follows by the preceding theorem that in a suitably chosenreetangular Cartesian 
co-ordinate system, all diagonal components of a are equal. When n = 3, we have 
a b c 
a = da e 
I g a 
(44.3) 
When the proper numbers of a are all distinct, 11 akmll can be transformed by real, but 
not necessarily orthogonal transformations to the form 1 
0 0 
(44.4) 
0 0 ... 1 0 
where cK= (-1)K+l J~l. When a has multipleproper numbers it can be reduced to a direct 
sum of matrices of the type (44.4). Denote by b the matrix on the right of Eq. (44.4). Then 
c-1 · b · c is diagonal 2, where 
C= 
(al)"-1 (a2)"-1 
(a1)n-2 (a2)"-2 
(44.5) 
This provides another proof of the result, noted in Sect. 3 7, tha t II ak m II can be red uced to 
diagonal form by real transformations if its proper numbers be real and distinct. 
Any matrix can be reduced by a complex transformation to a direct sum of matrices of 
the form 3 
a 1 0 0 
0 a 1 0 
(44.6) 
a 1 
0 0 0 a 
If all the proper numbers are real, the transformation may be taken as real also. NoLL has 
informed us that any real matrix can be transformed by a real transformation to a direct 
sum of matrices of the two forms (44.6) and 
0 1 0 . 
~I a b 1 0 
0 0 1 0 
0 a b 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 (44.7) 
0 a b 1 
0 0 0 1 
0 • a b 
When allproper numbers are distinct, the forms (44.6) and (44.7) reduce to llall and ~~~ ~~~· 
respectively. This furnishes still another proof that a matrix with real and distinct proper 
numbers can be diagonalized by a real transformation. 
1 Cf. MAcDuFFEE [1933, 2, § 39] for references and discussion. 
2 SCHUR [1909, 3]. 3 JORDAN [1!170, 4, p. 114]. 
844 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sects. 45. 46. 
d) Normaland shear components. 
45. Definitions. Except where otherwise noted, the second order tensors considered in the remainder of this chapter are assumed to be symmetric, there 
then being no distinction between right and left proper vectors. The scalar 
akm vk vm, where v is any unit vector, is called the normal component of a for the 
direction v. The scalar akmukvm, where u and v are unit vectors, is the shear 
component of a for the directions u and v, the normal components being included 
as a special case. When u and v are perpendicular unit vectors, we call akmukvm 
the corresponding orthogonal shear component. 
In orthogonal co-ordinates, the physical component a(kk) is the normal 
component of a for the direction of the tangent to the k-th Co-ordinate curve, 
while a(km), k=f=m, is the shear component for the directions of the tangents to 
the k-th and m-th co-ordinate curves. In passages where a fixed orthogonal coordinate system has been laid down, the phrases "normal components" and 
"shear components ", with no further qualification, mean the components 
a(kk) and a(km), k =f= m, respectively. 
Because of the existence of the canonical form exemplified by Eq. ( 44.3), 
it is always possible to refer a to an orthogonal co-ordinate system in which the 
normal components of a at a given point are alt equal. They can all be made to 
vanish if and only if a is traceless. In order for the normal components to be 
zero in all orthogonal co-ordinate system, it is necessary and sufficient that 
a = o. Since by assumption a is symmetric, there exist orthogonal co-ordinate 
systems in which lla<km>ll is diagonal at a given point; that is, it is always possible 
to refer a to an orthogonal co-ordinate system in which at a given point all the shear 
components are zero. These Co-ordinate systems are principal co-ordinate systems 
as defined in Sect. 37. In order for the shear components to vanish in allorthogonal 
co-ordinate systems, it is necessary and sufficient that a be spherical; for a 
spherical tensor, the shear component for the directions u and v is zero if and 
only if u and v be orthogonal. 
The proper numbers of a, which are real, we order as follows: 
(45.1) 
46. Extremal properties. Setting 
C- akmukvm, (46.1) 
for a fixed tensor a, we consider the problern of finding the extremes of the scalar C 
when the vectors u and v are varied subject to certain constraints. 
Problem 1. Let the constraints be u = v, uk uk = 1, so that C is the normal 
component of a for the direction u. Referring a to a reetangular Cartesian principal co-ordinate system, we then have 
C = a1 (u1) 2 + · · · +an (un) 2 , (u1) 2 + · · · + (un) 2 = 1, (46.2) 
and from Eq. (45.1) it follows that 
a1=a1{ (u1) 2+ · · · + (un) 2} ~aJ(u + · · · +an(un) ~a,.{ (u1) 2+ · · · + (un) 2}=a,., (46.3) 
so that ~C~a,.. To see when equality can hold on the left, we set a1=C 
in Eq. (46.2h and use Eq. (46.2) 2 , so obtaining 
0 = a1 {(u1) 2 - 1} + a2 (u2) 2+ · ·· + a"(u,.) 2 } 
= (a2 - a1) (u2)2 + ... + (a,.- a1) (u,.)2, (46.4) 
Sect. 46. Extremal properties. 845 
whence it follows by Eq. (45.1) that u11 =0 when k > 1 unless a11 =a1 • Therefore, letting K be the largest integer for which aK =a1 , so that a1 =a1 when 
I::;;;; K, we conclude that uK+1 = · · · =u,. =0, whence it follows by direct calculation that a~um = a1 u11 • Thus the normal component of a is greatest for the directions 
which are principal directions corresponding to the greatest proper number, and 
the value of the greatest normal component is the greatest proper number. Sirnilary, 
C takes on its minimum value a,. if and only if u be a proper vector of a corresponding to the proper nurober a,.. The remaining proper numbers of a are 
extremal values of C; if b> 1, ab is the maximum value of C when u ranges over 
the vectors which satisfy the constraints and are perpendicular to b - 1 mutually 
orthogonal proper vectors of a corresponding to the proper numbers1 a1 , ... , ab-l· 
In general C takes on these intermediate values for infinitely many vectors u 
which do not satisfy the orthogonality conditions and are not proper vectors 
of a. 
Problem 2. Let the constraints be u,. u" = v11 v" = 1, so that C is the shear 
component for the directions u and v. Extremal conditions for C are 
(46.5) 
where a and bare multipliers. Since u"oCfou"=v"oCfov"=C. we conclude 
that a = b; hence 
(46.6) 
lf a has two proper numbers ± a that are numerically equal but opposite in sign, 
Eq. (46.6) can be satisfied by choosing u and v to be non-parallel vectors such 
that u +v and u- v are proper vectors corresponding to a and - a. This includes the limiting case where zero is a multiple proper nurober of a. Otherwise, 
we must have u ± v = 0; the case u = v is that considered in Problem 1, while 
the case u = -v is similar. We have shown that extrema of shear components 
are always to be found among those for the coincident directions, which are the normal 
components, and among those for opposite directions; for additional extrema of 
the shear components to exist, it is necessary and sulficient that a have a pair of 
proper numbers ± a. 
Problem 3. In Problem 2, we add the further constraint u · v = 0, thus confining attention to orthogonal shear components. Clearly, the largest (smallest) 
value of C attainable with this additional constraint is never greater (less) than 
that attainable with the constraints of Problem 2. Extremal conditions are 
(46.7) 
where a, b, and c are multipliers. It follows that a = c and the corresponding 
extremal value of C is a. Therefore 
a,.". (um+ v"') = (a + b) (u11 + v,.), a,.m (um- v"') = (b- a) (u11 - v11). (46.8) 
The constraints require that the vectors u ± v be non-null, whence it follows that 
these are proper vectors corresponding to the proper numbers (b ±a) of a. This 
result is the theorem of Coulomb and Hopkins 2 : The maximum and minimum 
1 See, e.g., COURANT and HILBERT [1931, 2, pp. 20-23]. CAUCHY [1829, 1], [1830, 1, 
Chap. 11] noted that the proper numbers of a are the (real) extremal values of akm X 
uk u"'fli, u'. · 
2 The theoremwas derived in the plane case by CouLOMB [1 i76, 1, §VIII]; in the general 
case, by HoPKINS [1847, 2, §§ 4, 5]. 
846 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 46. 
orthogonal shear components of a are given by 
max C = t (a1 - an), min C = t (an- a1) (46.9) 
respectively, these being takenon if and only if V2u=m1 +mn, V2v =m1 -m,., 
where m 1 and mn areorthogonal unit proper vectors of a corresponding to the greatest 
and least proper numbers a1 and an. When a1 =an, a is spherical, so that all 
orthogonal shear components vanish, as follows also from (46.9). The remaining 
extremal values of C, as given by (46.8), are f(a0 -ae), b=J=e. Each of these 
is a minimax unless a0 - ae = ± (a 1 - an)· The octahedral invariant l..la, defined 
by Eq. ( 46.11), is thus the sum of the squares of the extremal orthogonal shear components of a. 
From Eq. (46.9) we observe that 
f (an- a1) ;;;;: akm uk v"' (u, u' V5 vs)-§ ;;;;: t (a 1 - an) 
for all non-null orthogonal vectors u and v. 
(46.10) 
In a reetangular Cartesian co-ordinate system such that at a given point 
n- 2 axes are principal axes of a and the remaining two are directions satisfying Eq. (46.7), a assumes the form 
d 0 0 
llakmll = 0 b a 
0 a b 
where d isadiagonal (n-2)X(n-2) matrix 1 . 
(46.11) 
Problem 4. We now take v as a fixed unit vector and vary u subject to the 
constraints uk uk = 1, uk vk = 0. Thus we seek the greatest shear components 
among all directions perpendicular to a given direction. As conditions that C 
be extremal, we obtain ak".v"'=auk+bvk. (46.12) 
Therefore b = ak". vk v"'; that is, bis the normal component of a for the direction v, 
and a, which satisfies 
(46.13) 
is the extremal value of C. When v is a proper vector of a, then C = 0 for all u 
satisfying the constraints. This is no more than the statement that the shear 
component for a principal direction and any direction orthogonal to it is zero. 
Otherwise Eq. (46.13) determine a unique value for a 2, and therefore Eq. (46.12) 
determines u up to sign. It can be shown that2 
a 2 - '\' (a - a )2 cos2 {} cos2 {} - L... b e b e• (46.14) 
b<e 
where {}0 is the angle between v and the proper vector of a corresponding to a0 • 
It is easily seen from the results of the preceding paragraph or from Eq. (46.14) 
that a2 ;S;: [f(a1 -an)J2, the equality holdingifand only if v lies in the plane of 
and bisects the angle between a pair of orthogonal proper vectors corresponding 
to a 1 and an. A direction for which a 2 is maximum is called a direction of maximum 
shear 3• When a1=j=a2 and an-r =f=a, there are precisely two such directions 4 , 
and these are orthogonal. Otherwise, there are infinitely many. 
1 SHARP [1882, 1, p. 229] showed that a could always be reduced to this form when 
n = 3. 
2 This and other results of this paragraph are due in essence to KLEITZ [1872, 5], [1873, 
3, § 12]. 
3 When n = 3, BoussrNESQ [1877, 1] noted that a 2, calculated for any unit vector v 
lying in the plane of the principal directions corresponding to a1 and a3 , is never less than 
the value of a2 for any unit vector v* suchthat ak",v*kv*"'=a.~,mvkvm. 
4 Here v and - v are counted as having the same direction. 
Sect. 47. Tensor lines and sheets: Definitions. 847 
Problem 5. We impose the constraints akm uk um =akm vk vm = 1, uk vk =0, and 
we require a to be positive definite. Proceeding as before, we obtain 
(46.15) 
hence 
The constraints imply that u ± v =f= 0. Since aispositive definite, akm (um± vm) =f= 0, 
whence it follows from Eq. (46.15) that a =f= ± 1. Therefore the directions giving 
C extreme values are the same as those which are extremal for the orthogonal 
shears, but now b/(1- a) and b/(1 + a) areproper numbers of a. A simple calculation then yields the extremal values 
b=f=e, (46.17) 
taken on when u and v lie in the plane of and bisect the angle between orthogonal 
proper vectors corresponding to ab and ae. Since a is positive definite, its proper 
numbers are all positive, so Eq. ( 45.1) implies that 
(46.18) 
whence follows 
(46.19) 
Comparing Eqs. (46.17) and (46.19) shows that the maximum value of C is 
(a1 -an)f(a1 +an), the minimum value (an-a1)/(a1 +anl· One or the other of 
these values is taken on when the directions of u and v are both directions of 
maximum shear. These results may be rephrased as follows: Wehave 
(an- a1)j(a1 +an) ;;;;;; akm uk vm(a,s u' U 5 a1u v1 vu)-~ ;S; (a1 - anlf(a1 +an) (46.20) 
for all non-null orthogonal vectors u and v; when the directions of u and v 
are directions of maximum shear, either the right or left equality holds in 
Eq. (46.20). 
e) Tensor lines and sheets. 
47. Definitions. There are direction fields, such as the principal directions 
and the directions of maximum shear, which are intrinsically related to a given 
second order tensor field. For any such direction field, one can determine vector 
lines or sheets as indicated in Sect. 29. Vector lines of the principal directions 
and of the directions of maximum shear are called principal and shear trajectories, 
respectively. These are special kinds of tensor lines, defined as curves x =X (u) 
satisfying differential equations of the form F (a, dxjdu) = 0, where Fis a tensor 
invariant of the indicated arguments1. For example, for principal trajectories, 
we may take F to be the invariant given by 
(47.1) 
so that the vanishing of Fis necessary and sufficient that ak m dxmfdu and dxkfdu 
be parallel, i.e. that dxfdu be a proper vector of a. 
Similarly, a tensor sheet is a surface f (x) = const satisfying differential equations of the form G (a, grad /) =0, where Gis a tensorinvariant of the indicated 
arguments. As a special case, the isostatic surfaces, defined as surfaces whose 
1 It is understood that F may depend an the metric tensor 1 and may be multi-valued. 
848 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. Sect. 48. 
normals are proper vectors of a, satisfy e.g. 
Gm,=/," a"[m/,,1 = 0. {47.2) 
A necessary and sufficient condition that there exist a congruence of isostatic 
surfaces is that some proper vector be lamellar, all proportional proper vectors 
thus being complex-lamellar 1 . The normal trajectories of these surfaces are 
principal trajectories. When isostatic surfaces f = const corresponding to the 
proper number a exist, they are the solutions of the equations 
(a"m-ar/:,.)/"=0. {47.3) 
When a tensor a enjoys n independent families of isostatic surfaces, these 
may be selected as co-ordinate surfaces of an isostatic co-ordinate system, in 
general not orthogonal. When a is referred to isostatic co-ordinates, the components a" m vanish everywhere when k =j= m. Therefore the expression (3 7.17) 
for the covariant derivative of a reduces to a particularly simple form 2 : 
a", " p = oa"" "xP ( unsumme d) , ) V (47.4) 
a"~P = {""p} (a""- am m) (k =Fm, unsummed), 
and Eq. {37.18) may be simplified analogously. Conversely, if a" ... = 0 when 
k =j= m, the co-ordinate system is isostatic, and all proper vectors of a are complexlamellar. 
Surfaces of maximum shear are surfaces whose normals are directions of maximum shear. In order that there exist a congruence of such surfaces, it is necessary 
and sufficient that at least one of the directions of maximum shear be complexlamellar. The normal trajectories of these surfaces are shear trajectories. 
48. Isostatic surfaces of symmetric tensors. Consider first a symmetric field a 
with n distinct proper numbers. To obtain necessary and sufficient conditions 
that its proper vectors all be complex-lamellar, we may use the criterion of 
RICCI and LEVI-CIVITA 3 , which asserts that n mutually orthogonal unit vector 
fields ma are all complex-lamellar if and only if 
m~m'bmck,,=O, (48.1) 
If we choose the ma tobe unit proper vectors of a symmetric tensor a with distinct 
proper numbers, Eq. {48.1) provides necessary and sufficient conditions that all 
proper vectors of a be complex-lamellar. EISENHART4 noted that Eq. {48.1) can 
be replaced by 
a,.d-,c=j=, {48.2) 
still assuming that a has distinct proper numbers. Analysis of WEINGARTEN 5 
shows that, in three dimensions, Eq. {48.2) can be replaced by the three condi1 LAME [1841, 2, Introd.], [1851, 3, § 90], [1859, 1, § 148] introduced isostatic surfaces and presumed that they always exist. BoussiNESQ [1872, 2] was first to note that 
their existence is exceptional. 2 It was these formulae, due in principle to LAME [1841, 2, §XI], [1859, 1, § 149], that 
motivated the introduction of isostatic surfaces. 3 [1901, 1, p. 151]. 4 [1913, 2, Eq. (29)]. EISENHART claims also to derive necessary and sufficient conditions for the case where two proper numbers of a coincide in a region. His analysis is in 
error, his Eqs. (36) and (37) being sufficient but not necessary conditions that his Eqs. (34) 
and (35) hold. 6 [1881, 3]. FRIEDMANN [1912, 1] characterized the subset of tensors satisfying 
WEINGARTEN's conditions which satisfy also akm m = 0 and are such that each proper number 
is constant over the isostatic surface correspondi.;g to it. · 
Sect. 49. Isostatic surfaces of asymmetric tensors. 849 
tions 
a ak s"P = a bk Brsp = b bk ersP = 0 kr,s P kr,s P kr,s P (48.3) 
where 2 b:- ~rs Bqtp a~ af. Equivalent conditions are 1 
a ak e"P = a a2 k ersP = a ak a2 ' e•Pq = 0 kr,s P kr,s p (kr,s) P q • (48.4) 
WhPn a three-dimensional tensor has two but not three coincident proper numbers 
throughout a region, it can be shown that WEINGARTEN's and DoYLE's conditions 
g_re necessary and sufficient that a field of proper vectors corresponding to the 
simple proper number be lamellar. lf and only if the corresponding isostatic 
surfaces can be embedded in a triply orthogonal family of surfaces, which is not 
always true 2, there will exist three mutually orthogonal complex-lamellar proper 
vectors of a. The same conditions are necessary and sufficient for the existence 
of an orthogonal co-ordinate system in which the shear components of a vanish 
identically. lf all three proper numbers of a coincide in a region, a is diagonal 
in any orthogonal co-ordinate system, so that triply orthogonal families of isostatic surfaces always exist trivially in this case. 
Consider a vector v of the form 
V = A a ma, A a = const (48.5) 
where the m 11 are the independent unit proper vectors of a. Such a vector is 
complex-lamellar if and only if3 
L (ac- abt1 ~,. a,.v,s m~ m{; vk Ac mb, = 0, (48.6) 
b'i't 
it being assumed that the proper numbers of a are all distinct. Necessary and 
sufficient conditions for the existence of a congruence of isostatic surfaces corresponding to the proper number a result from setting A a = <5~ in Eqs. ( 48.5) 
and (48.6). No one has obtained equivalent conditions for the existence of isostatic surfaces corresponding to a single proper number which are expressible as 
the vanishing of polynomials in akm and akm,r· It seems probable that this is 
impossible. 
49. Isostatic surfaces of asymmetric tensors. We restriet attension to tensors 
whose proper numbers are real and distinct, and we avoid introducing a metric 
tensor. From Eqs. (37.2), (37.12) 3 , and (37.9) we then have 
.. a~= L abqi,mbk• makq~=c5ab• b=l 
(49.1) 
(49.2) 
with ab=!= ac when b =!= c. We seek conditions that mb be complex-lamellar. Differentiating Eq. (49.1)1 , we obtain 
(49.3) 
Since the vectors mc are linearly independent, there exist quantities A~, such 
that 
(49.4) 
1 DOYLE [1958, 1]. 
2 CAYLEY [1872, 3], [1873, 1], using a method suggested by L:Evv [1870, 2], first 
worked out necessary and sufficient conditions that it be possible to embed one, two, or three 
given congruences of surfaces in a triply orthogonal system. Cf. FORSYTH [ 1920, 1, Chap. XI]. 8 THOMAS [1944, 2, Eq. (11)]. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 54 
850 J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
Making this substitution in Eq. (49.3) and using Eq. (49.1h, we obtain 
(a",- ab~) m,,.A'br = (a,- ab) mcsA'br• } 
=-(oa".f ox'- oabf ox'~)mbk. 
We multiply by qi,, sum on s and use Eq. (49.2h; when b=j=b, we get 
A bbr =(ab- ab)-1 8a",/ 8 x' q~ mbk, 
so that Eq. (49.4) can be written as 
Sect. 50. 
(49.5) 
(49.6) 
8mb,.j8x'=muAbbr+ L m,,.(ab-a,)- 8a~J8x'mbpq~ (b unsummed). (49.7) 
'*b 
By Eq. (33.5) 2 , for mb tobe complex-lamellar it is necessary and sufficient that 
where, from Eq. (49.7), 
Mbskr= L mb,mck(ab-ac)-1 8aP,Jox'mbpr/c. '*b 
the term involving Abbr contributing nothing to Mblskrl' 
(49.8) 
(49.9) 
50. Surfaces of maximum shear. As was noted in Sect. 46, for a symmetric 
tensor a with distinct proper numbers there are two directions of maximum 
shear, given byV2u=m1 +m,., V2v =m1 -m,., where m1 and m,. are unit proper 
vectors of a corresponding respectively to the largest and smallest proper numbers. We assume n =3· From Eqs. (48.5) and (48.6), by setting A1 = A2 =2-i, A3 
=0 andA1 = -A2 =2-i,A3 =0 we obtain necessary andsufficient conditions that 
u and v, respectively, be complex-lamellar. These conditions reduce to 
ak,,s { (a1 - a2)-1 m1 m~ (m~- m~) -2 (a1 - aa)-1 m1 m3 m~ + ) 
+ (a2 -a }- m~m3(m~- mj)} = 0, (50.1) ak,,s { (a1 - a2}-1 m~ m~ (mj + mj) - 2 (ai- aa)-1 m1 m3m~+ 
+ (a2 - a3}-1 m~m3(m~+m3)} = 0. 
Adding and subtracting these formulae yields the slightly simpler equivalent 
conditions1 
ak,,s { (a1 - a2)-1 m~ m~ mj- 2(a1 - a3}-1 m~ m3 m~ + ) 
+( a )-1 " , •}-o 2 -a3 m2 m3 m1 - , 
-1 k , s -1 " , • ak,,s{(a1 -a2) m1 m2 m1 +(a2 -a3) m3 m2 m3}=0. 
(50.2) 
Either Eqs. (50.1) or Eqs. (50.2) are necessary and sufficient for the existence 
of two congruences of surfaces of maximum shear, necessarily orthogonal. If 
there exist a congruence of surfaces normal to both, i.e. if there exists a congruence 
of isostatic surfaces corresponding to the proper nurober a2 , the triply orthogonal 
family can be introduced as co-ordinate surfaces. In such a system, the matrix 
of physical components of a takes the form (46.10). 
References. 
17 57 1. EuLER, L.: Continuation des recherches sur la theorie du mouvement des fluides. 
Hist. Acad. Berlin 1755, 316-361. 
1759 1. LAGRANGE, J.L.: Recherehes sur la methode de maximums et minimums. Mise. 
Taur.1, 18-33 =Oeuvres 1, 3-20. ------
1 THOMAS [ 1944, 2, p. 1 72] gives these in principal co-ordinates. 
1762 I. 
1770 I. 
2. 
1771 I. 
1772 I. 
1776 I. 
1787 I. 
References. 851 
LAG RANGE, J. L.: Nouvelles recherches sur Ia nature et Ia propagation du son. 
Mise. Taur. 2 2, 11-172 (1760-1761) =Oeuvres 1, 151-316. 
EuLER, L.: Institutionum Calculi Integralis Volumen Tertium. Petropolis = Opera 
(1) 13. 
EULER, L.: Sectio secunda de principiis motus fluidorum. Novi Comm. Petrop. 
14, 270- 386 ( 1 769). 
EuLER, L.: Sectio tertia de motu fluidarum lineari potissimum aquae. Novi Comm. 
Petrop. 15, 219-360 (1770). 
EuLER, L.: Sectio quarta de motu aerio in tu bis. Novi Comm. Petrop. 16, 281-425 
(1770). 
CouLOMB, C. A. : Essai sur une application des regles de maximis et minimis a 
quelques problemes de statique, relatifs a l'architecture. Mem. Math. Phys. Acad. 
Sei. divers savans 7, 343-382 (1773). 
MaNGE, G.: Supplement, ou l'on fait voir que !es equations aux differences ordinaires, pour lesquelles !es conditions d'integrabilite ne sont pas satisfaites, sont 
susceptibles d'une veritable integration, et que c'est de cette integration que depend 
celle des equations aux differences partielles elevees. Mem. Acad. Sei. Paris 1784, 
502-576. 
1806 I. EuLER, L.: Die Gesetze des Gleichgewichts und der Bewegung flüssiger Körper. 
Leipzig, Translation by H.W. BRANDES of (1770,I). (1771, I), (1772,I). 
1813 I. GAuss, C.F.: Theoriae attractionis corporum sphaerodicorum ellipticorum homogeneorum methodus nova tractata. Comm. Soc. Sei. Götting. 2 =Werke 5, 3-22. 
1818 I. PFAFF, J.F.: Methodus generalis, aequationes differentiarum partia!ium, nec non 
aequationes differentiales vulgares, utrasque primi ordinis, inter quascunque variabiles, complete integrandi (1815). Abh. Akad. Wiss. Berlin 1814-1815, 76-136; 
trans. G. KawALEWSKI: Allgemeine Methode, partielle Differentialgleichungen zu 
1826 I. 
1828 I. 
2. 
1829 I. 
1830 I. 
1831 I. 
1833 I. 
1840 I. 
1841 I. 
2. 
1842 I. 
2. 
1846 I. 
1847 I. 
integrieren. Ostwald's Klass.- 129, Leipzig, 1902. 
AMPERE, A. M.: Memoire sur Ia theorie mathematique des phenomenes electrodynamiques uniquement deduite de l'experience. Paris. 
CAUCHY, A. L.: Sur !es centres, !es planes principaux et !es axes principaux des 
surfaces du second degre. Ex de math. 3 =Oeuvres (2) 8, 9-35-
GREEN, G.: An essay an the application of mathematical analysis to the theories 
of electricity and magnetism. Nottingham = J. reine angew. Math. 39, 73-89 
(1850); 44, 356-374 (1852); 47, 161-221 (1854) =Papers 3-115. 
CAUCHY, A. L.: Sur l'equation a l'aide de laquelle an determine !es inegalites 
seculaires des mouvement des planetes. Ex. de math. 4, 140-160 =Oeuvres (2) 9, 
174-195. 
CAUCHY, A. L.: Memoire sur l'equation qui a pour racines !es moments d'inertie 
principaux d'un corps solide et sur diverses equations du meme genre. Mem. 
Acad. Sei. Paris 9, 111-113 =Oeuvres (1) 2, 79-81. 
OsTROGRADSKY: Note sur une integrale qui se rencontre dans Je calcul de l'attraction des spheroides. Mem. Acad. Sei. St. Petersb., Ser. Math. (6), 1, 39-53. 
LAME, G., and E. CLAPEYRON: Memoire sur l'equilibre des corps solides homogenes. 
Mem. divers savants (2) 4, 465- 562. 
LAME, G.: Memoire sur !es coordonnees curvilignes. J. Math. pures appl. 5, 313 to 
347. 
CAUCHY, A. L.: Memoire sur !es dilatations, !es condensations et !es rotations 
produits par un changement de forme dans un systeme de points materiels. Ex. 
Am. phys. math. 2 = Oeuvres (2) 12, 343-377-
LAME, G.: Memoire sur !es surfaces isostatiques dans !es corps solides homogenes 
en equilibre d'elasticite. J. Math. pures appl. 6, 37-60. 
CHALLIS, J.: A general investigation of the differential equations applicable to 
the mntion of fluids. Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 7, 371-393. 
STOKES, G. G.: On the steady motion of incorr.pressible fluids. Trans. Cambridge 
Phi!. Soc. 8, 287-319 (1844-1849) =Papers 1, 1-16. 
BoRCHARDT, C. W.: Neue Eigenschaft der Gleichung, mit deren Hülfe man die 
säcularen Störungen der Planeten bestimmt. J. reine angew. Math. 30, 38-46. 
BORCHARDT, C. W.: Deve!oppements sur J'equation a J'aide de laqueile on determine 
!es inegalities seculaires du mouvement des planetes. J. Math. pures appl. (1) 12, 
50-67. 
54* 
852 
2. 
1849 I. 
1850 I. 
1851 I. 
2. 
3. 
1854 I. 
1855 I. 
1856 I. 
2. 
1857 I. 
1858 I. 
2. 
1859 I. 
1861 I. 
1862 I. 
1863 I. 
2. 
1867 I. 
1869 I. 
1870 I. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1872 I. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
HoPKINS, W.: On the internal pressure to which rock masses may be subjected, 
and its possible influence in the production of Iaminated structure. Trans. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 8, 456-470 (1844-1849). 
THoMSON, W.: (Lord KELVIN), Notes on Hydrodynamics (5), On the vis-viva of 
a liquid in motion. Cambridge Dubl. Math. J. 4, 90-94 =Papers 1, 107-112. 
TARDY, P.: Some Observations on a new equation in hydrodynamics. Phi!. Mag. 
36, 171-178. 
THOMSON, W.: (Lord KELVIN). A mathematical theory of magnetism. Phi!. Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Lond. 141, 243-285 = Papers Electr. Magn. §§ 432-523. 
STOKES, G. G.: On the dynamical theory of diffraction (1849). Trans. Cambridge 
Phi!. Soc. 91, 1-62 =Papers 2, 243-328. 
LAME, G.: Le\!ons sur Ia theorie mathematique de I'elasticite des corps solides. 
Paris. 
SToKES, G. G.: SMITH's Prize Examination Papers (February 1954). Papers 5, 
320-322. 
HERMITE, C.: Remarque sur un theoreme de M. CAUCHY. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
41, 181-183. 
SPOTTISWOODE, W.: Elementary theorems relating to determinants. J. reine 
angew. Math. 51, 209-271, 328-381. 
RANKINE, W. J. M.: On axes of elasticity and crystalline forms. Phi!. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. Lond. 146, 261-285. 
RIEMANN, B.: Lehrsätze aus der Analysis Situs für die Theorie der Integrale von 
zweigliedrigen vollständigen Differentialen. J. reine angew. Math. 54, 105-109 
=Werke, 2nd. ed. 91-96. 
HELMHOL TZ, H.: Über Integrale der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen, welche den 
Wirbelbewegungen entsprechen. J. reine angew. Math. 55, 25-55 = Wiss. Abh. 
1, 101-134; trans. P.G. TAIT: On integrals of the hydrodynamical equations, 
which express vortex-like motion. Phi!. Mag. (4) 33, 485-512 (1867). 
CAYLEY, A.: A memoir on the automorphic transformation of a bipartite quadric 
function. Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 148, 39-46 = Works 2, 497-505. 
LAME, G.: Le\!ons sur les coordonnees curvilignes. Paris. 
HANKEL, H.: Zur allgemeinen Theorie der Bewegung der Flüssigkeiten. Göttingen. 
WARREN, J. W.: On the internal pressure within an elastic solid. Quart. J. Pure 
Appl. Math. 5, 109-117. 
RocK, G.: Anwendung der Potentialausdrücke auf die Theorie der molekularphysikalischen Fernewirkungen und der Bewegung der Electricität in Leitern. 
J. reine angew. Math. 61, 283-308. 
CLEBSCH, A.: Über eine Classe von Gleichungen, welche nur reelle Wurzeln besitzen. 
J. reine angew. Math. 62, 232-245. 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN), and P. G. TAIT: Treatise on Natural Philosophy, 
Part I. Cambridge. 
THOMSON, W. (Lord KELVIN): On vortex motion. Trans. roy. Soc. Edinb. 25, 217 to 
260 = Papers 4, 13-66. 
VELTMANN, W.: Die Helmholtz'sche Theorie der FlüssigkeitswirbeL Z. Math. 
Phys. 15, 450-463. 
L:Evv, M.: Memoire sur !es coordonnees curvilignes orthogonales. J. Ecole Polytech. 
26, 157-200. 
MAXWELL, J. C.: On reciprocal figures, frames, and diagrams of forces. Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Edinb. 26, 1-40 (1869-1872) =Papers 2, 161-207. 
JoRDAN, C.: Traite des Substitutionset des equations algebriques. Paris. 
CAYLEY, A.: On the extraction of the square root of a matrix of the third order. 
Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 6, 92-93 =Papers 1, 74-75-
BousSINESQ, J.: Lois geometriques de la distribution des pressions, dans un solide 
homogene et ductile soumis a des deformations planes. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
74, 242-246. 
CAvÜ:v, A.: Sur Ia condition pour qu'une famille de surfaces donnees puisse faire 
partie d'un systeme orthogonal. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 75, 177-185, 246-250, 
324-330, 381-385 and 1801-1803 =Papers 8, 269-291. 
CLEBSCH, A.: Ueber eine Fundamentalaufgabe der Invariantentheorie. Abh. Ges. 
Wiss. Göttingen, math.-phys. Kl. 17, 1-62. 
5. 
1873 1. 
2. 
3. 
1875 1. 
1877 1. 
1878 1. 
1879 1. 
1880 1. 
2. 
3. 
1881 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1882 1. 
2. 
1883 1. 
2. 
References. 853 
ST. VENANT, A.-J .-C. DE: Rapport sur un memoire deM. KLEITZ intitule "Etudes 
sur les forces moleculaires dans les liquides en mouvement et application a l'hydrodynamique". C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 74, 426-438. 
CAYLEY, A.: On curvature and orthogonal surfaces. Phi!. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 
163, 229-251. 
MAXWELL, J. C.: A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. 2 vols. Oxford. 
KLEITZ, M.: Etudes sur les forces moleculaires dans le liquides en mouvement et 
application a l'hydrodynamique. Paris. 
LIPSCHITZ, R.: Determinazione della pressione nell'intorno d'un fluido incompressibile suggetto ad attrazioni interne ed esterne. Ann. di Mat. (2) 6, 226-231 
(1873-1875). 
BoussiNESQ, J.: Sur Ia construction geometrique des pressions qui supportent 
!es divers elements plans se croisant en un meme point d'un corps, et sur celle des 
deformations qui se produisent autor d'un tel point. J. Math. pures appl. (3) 3, 
147-152. 
Voss, A.: Zur Theorie der orthogonalen Substitutionen. Math. Ann. 13, 320-374. 
LAMB, H.: A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of the Motion of Fluids. Cambridge. 
RowLAND, H. A.: On the motion of a perfect incompressible fluid when no solid 
bodies are present. Amer. J. Math. 3, 226-268. 
CRAIG, T.: Motion of viscous fluids. J. Franklin Inst. 110, 217-227. 
CRAIG, T.: On steady motion in an incompressible viscous fluid. Phi!. Mag. (5) 
10, 342-357. 
GIBBS, J. W.: Elements of Vector Analysis, Part I. New Haven = Works 2, 17-36. 
GROMEKA, I.: Certain Cases of Motion of an lncompressible Fluid [In Russian], 
Kazan Sobr. Sotch. 76-148. 
WEINGARTEN, J.: Zur Theorie der isotatischen Flächen. J. reine angew. Math. 
90, 18-33. 
STICKELBURG ER, L.: Zur Theorie der linearen Differentialgleichungen. Leipzig. 
CRAIG, T.: Methods and Results, General Properties of the Equations of Steady 
Motion. U.S. Treasury Dep't. (Coast and Geod. Surveys) Document 71, Washington. 
SHARP, W. J. C.: On the invariants of a certain orthogonal transformation, with 
special reference to the theory of the strains and stresses of an elastic solid. Proc. 
Lond. Math. Soc. 13, 216-239. 
MoHR, 0.: Über die Darstellung des Spannungszustandes und des Deformationszustandes eines Körperelementes und über die Anwendung derselben in der Festigkeitslehre. Civilingenieur 28, 112-155. 
THOMSON, J. J.: A Treatise on the Motion of Vortex Rings. London. 
SYLVESTER, J. J.: On the equation to the secular inequalities in the planetary 
theory. Phi!. Mag. (5) 16, 267-269. 
1884 1. GIBBS, J. W.: Elements of Vector Analysis, Part II. New Haven = Works 2, 
1885 1. 
1886 1. 
1887 1. 
2. 
3. 
1889 1. 
2. 
1890 1. 
2. 
1892 1. 
50-90. 
WEYR, E.: Repartition des matrices en especes et formation de toutes !es especes. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 100, 966-969. 
TonHUNTER, L., and K. PEARSoN: A History of the Theory of Elasticity, Vol. 1. 
Cambridge. 
POINCARE, H.: Sur les residus des integrales doubles. Acta math. 6, 321-380. 
WEYR, E.: Note sur Ia theorie des quantites complexes formees avec n unites 
principales. Bull. Sei. math. (2) 11, 205-215. 
BoGGIO-LERA, E.: Sulla cinematica dei mezzi continui. Nuovo Cim. (3) 22, 63-69, 
143-149, 231-240; 23, 41-55, 158-162 (1888) = Ann. R. Scuola Norm. Pisa 
4, 53-99-
BELTRAMI, E.: Considerazioni idrodinamiche. Rend. Ist. Lombardo (2) 22, 121-130 
= Opere 4, 300-309. 
MoRERA, Z. G.: Sui moti elicoidali dei fluidi. Rend. Lincei (4) 5, 611-617. 
WEYR, E.: Zur Theorie der bilinearen Formen. Mh. Math. Phys. 1, 163-236. 
GILBERT, P. H.: Sur quelques formules d'un usage general dans Ia physique mathematique. Ann. Soc. Sei., Bruxelles 14, 1-18. 
FINGER, J.: Über die gegenseitigen Beziehungen von gewissen in der Mechanik mit 
V ortheil anwendbaren Flächen zweiter Ordnung nebst Anwendungen auf Probleme 
der Astatik. Wien. Sitzgsber. (lla) 101, 1105-1142. 
854 
1893 
1895 
1896 
1897 
1900 
1901 
1902 
1903 
1905 
1908 
1909 
1910 
1911 
J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
2. LovE, A. E. H.: A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity. Cambridge. 
3. FABRI, C.: Sulla teoria dei moti vorticosi nei fluidi incompressibili. Nuovo Cim. 
(3). 31, 135-145. 221-227 = Ann. R. Scuola Pisa 7, No. 4, 35 pp. (1895). 
4. FINGER, J.: Über die gegenseitigen Beziehungen von gewissen in der Mechanik mit 
V ortheil anwendbaren Flächen zweiter Ordnung nebst Anwendungen auf Probleme 
der Astatik. Wien. Sitzgsber. (IIa) 101, 1105-1142. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
1. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
POINCARE, H.: Le<;ons sur Ia theorie des tourbillons. Paris. 
HADAMARD, J.: Resolution d'une question relative aux determinants. Bull. Sei. 
math. (2), 17, 240-246. 
BANG, A. S.: Om en Trediegradsligning. Nyt. Tidss. Math. 4, B, 57-60; 9 B, 
94-96. 
PoiNCARE, H.: Analysis situs. J. Ecole Polytech. (2) 1, 1-123. 
FROBENIUS, G.: Über vertauschbare Matrizen. Sitzgsber. preuß. Akad. Wiss. 1, 
601-614. 
Mum, T.: On LAGRANGE's determinantal equation. Phi!. Mag. 43, 220-226. 
CossERAT, E. et F.: Sur Ia theorie de l'elasticite. Ann. Toulouse 10, I 1-I 116. 
FöPPL, A.: Die Geometrie der Wirbelfelder. Leipzig. 
APPELL, P.: Sur !es equations de l'hydrodynamique et Ia theorie des tourbi!lons. 
J. Math. pures appl. (5) 3, 5-16. 
LEVI-CIVITA, T.: Complementi al teorema de Malus-Dupin. Rend. Lincei (5a) 
91, 185-189. 237-245. 
MoHR, 0.: Welche Umstände bedingen die Elastizitätsgrenze und den Bruch eines 
Materials? Z. Ver. Dtsch. Ing. 44, 1524-1530. 
Ricci, G., et T. LEVI-CIVITA: Methodes de calcul differentiel absolu et leurs applications. Math. Ann. 54, 125-201. 
HIRSCH, A.: Sur !es racines d'une equation fondamentale. Acta math. 25, 367-370. 
BENDIXON, I.: Sur !es racines d'une equation fondamentale. Acta math. 25, 359 to 
365. 
BROMWICH, T. J .I. A.: Theorems on matrices and bilinear forms. Proc. Cambridge 
Phi!. Soc. 11, 75-91. 
BuRNSIDE, W. S., and A. W. PANTON: The Theory of Equations with an lntroduction to the Theory of Binary Algebraic Forms. Dublin. 
AuTONNE, L.: Sur l'hermetien. Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 16, 104-128. 
AUTONNE, L.: Sur ]es groupes lineaires, reels, et orthogonaux. Bull. Soc. Math. 
France 30, 121-134. 
AuTONNE, L.: Sur l'hypohermetien. Bull. Soc. Math. France 31, 140-155-
HADAMARD, J.: Le<;ons sur Ia propagation des ondes et !es equations de l'hydrodynamique. Paris. 
BLUMENTHAL, 0.: Über die Zerlegung unendlicher Vektorfelder. Math. Annalen 
61, 235-250. 
FROBENIUS, G.: Über Matrizen aus positiven Elementen. Sitzgsber. preuß. Akad. 
Wiss. 1, 471-476. 
STEKLOFF, W.: Sur Ia theorie des tourbillons. Ann. Fac. Sei. Toulouse (2) 10, 
271-334. 
GIBBS, J.W., and E.B. WILSON: Vector Analysis. New Haven. 
ScHUR, L.: Über die characteristischen Wurzeln einer linearen Substitution. Math. 
Annalen 66, 488-510. 
ScHUR, I.: Beiträge zur Theorie der Gruppen linearer homogener Substitutionen. 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 10, 159-175-
KoLosov, V. V.: On an application of complex function theory to a plane problern 
of the mathematical theory of elasticity. Yuriev. (We have been unable to see 
this reference.) 
CARATHEODORY, C.: Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Thermodynamik. 
Math. Annalen 67, 355-386. 
FROBENIUS, G.: Über die mit einer Matrix vertauschbaren Matrizen. Sitzgsber. 
preuß. Akad. Wiss. 2, 3-15. 
VEBLEN, 0., and J.W. YouNG: Projective Geometry. Boston. 
RANUM, A.: The general term of a recurring series. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 17, 
457-461. 
KARMAN, TH. v.: Festigkeitsversuche unter allseitigem Druck. Z. Ver. Dtsch. 
Ing. 55, 1749-1757-
References. 855 
1912 1. FRIEDMAN, A.: Sur Ia recherchedes surfaces isodynamiques. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 
154, 864-865. 
2. KARMAN, TH. v.: Festigkeitsversuche unter allseitigem Druck. Forsch.-Arb. 
Ing.-Wes. 1912, 37-68. 
1914 1. HILTON, H.: Homogeneaus Linear Substitutions. Oxford. 
2. MoHR, 0.: Abhandlungen aus dem Gebiete der Technischen Mechanik, 2nd ed. 
Berlin. 
3. BuRGATTI, P.: Sulle deformazioni finite dei corpi continui. Mem. Accad. Sei. 
Bologna (7) 1, 237-244. 
1915 1. BoKER, R.: Die Mechanik der bleibenden Formänderung in kristallinisch aufgebauten Körpern. Forsch.-Arb. Ing.-Wes. 1915, 1-15. 
1918 1. WEYL, H.: Gravitation und Electrizität. Sitzgsber. preuß. Akad. Wiss. 1918, 
465-480. 
1919 1. LECORNU, L.: Sur !es tourbillans d'une veine fluide. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 168, 
923-926. 
2. PHILLIPS, H. B.: Functions of matrices. Am er. J. Math. 41, 266-278. 
3. TRKAL, V.: Poznamka k hydrodynamice vazkych tekutin. Casopis Pest. Mat. 
Fys. 48, 302-320. 
1920 1. FoRSYTH, A. R.: Lectures on the Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces. 
Cambridge. 
1921 1. APPELL, P.: Traite de Mecanique Rationelle, Val. 3. Equilibre et Mouvement des 
1923 1. 
2. 
3. 
1924 1. 
1925 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1926 1. 
2. 
3. 
1927 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Milieux Continus, 3rd. ed. Paris. 
WEITZENBÖCK, R. : Invariantentheorie. Groningen. 
EISENHART, L. P.: Orthogonalsystems of hypersurfaces in a generat Riemann space. 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 25, 259-280. 
CrsoTTI, U.: Considerazione sulla nota formula idrodinamica di Daniele Bernoulli. 
Bull. Un. Mat. Ital. 2, 125-128. 
CoLDONAZZO, B.: Sulla geometria differenziale di superficie aventi interesse idrodinamico. Rend. Lincei (5A) 33 2, 396-400. 
CoLDONAzzo, B.: Un' osservazione a proposito del teorema di Bernoulli. Ball. Un. 
Mat. Ital. 4, 1 -3. 
WEDDERBURN, J.H.M.: The absolute value of the product of two matrices. Bull. 
Amer. Math. Soc. 31, 304-308. 
THIRRING, H.: Zur tensoranalytischen Darstellung der Elastizitätstheorie. Phys. 
z. 26, 518-522. . 
HENCKY, H.: Die Bewegungsgleichungen beim nichtstationären Fließen plastischer 
Massen. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 5, 144-146. 
HENSEL, K.: Über Potenzreihen von Matrizen. Sitzgsber. preuß. Akad. Wiss. 1, 
601-614. 
DIRAC, P.A.M.: On quantum algebra. Proc. Cambridge Phi!. Soc. 33, 412-418. 
LAGRANGE, R.: Calcul differentiel absolu. Mem. Sei. Math. 19, Paris. 
MICH AL, A. D.: Fundionals of r-dimensional manifolds admitting continuous groups 
of point transformations. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 29, 612-646. 
PASTOR!, M.: Sulle superficie ortogonali a una congruenza normale di curve. Rend. 
Ist. Lombardo (2), 60, 111-119. 
MASOTTI, A.: Decomposizione intrinseca del vortice e sue applicazioni. Rend. Ist. 
Lombardo (2) 60, 869-874. 
BoRTOLOTTI, E.: Spazi subordinati: equazioni di Gauss e Codazzi. Ball. Un. Mat. 
Ital. 6, 134-137. 
W AERDEN, B. L. VAN DER: Differentialkovarianten von n-dimensionalen Mannigfaltigkeiten in Riemannschen rn-dimensionalen Räumen. Abh. Math. Sem. Harnburg Univ. 5, 154-160. 
1928 1. BRoWNE, E. T.: The characteristic equation of a matrix. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 
34, 363-368. 
1929 1. KELLOGG, O.D.: Foundations of Potential Theory. New York. 
1930 1. KAMKE, E.: Differentialgleichungen reeller Funktionen. Leipzig. 
2. Mum, T.: Contributions to the History of the Theory of Determinants, 1900-1920. 
London. 
3. SIGNORINI, A.: Sulle deformazioni finite dei sistemi continui. Rend. Lince (6) 
12, 312-316. 
4. ScHOUTEN, J. A., and E. R. VAN KAMPEN: Zur Einbettungs-und Krümmungstheorie 
nichtholonomer Gebilde. Math. Annalen 103, 7 52-783. 
856 
1931 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
McCONNELL, A.J.: Applications of the Absolute Differential Calculus. Glasgow. 
CoURANT, R., and D. HILBERT: Methoden der Mathematischen Physik, Bd. 1. 
Berlin. 
BuRGATTI, P.: Intorno a una formula generale di trasformazione di un integrale 
di spazio in uno di superficie e alle sue varie deduzioni. Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. 10, 
1-5. 
MuRNAGHAN, F.D., and A. WINTNER: A canonical form for real matrices under 
orthogonal transformations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. Wash. 17, 417-420. 
WINTNER, A., and F. D. MuRNAGHAN: On a polar representation of nonsingular 
square matrices. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. Wash. 17, 676-678. 
TucKER, A. W.: On generalised covariant differentiation. Ann. of Math. (2) 32, 
451-460. 
1932 1. PLANCK, M.: General mechanics, art. 28 of Introduction to Theoretical Physics, 
Vol. 1. London. 
2. CIPOLLA, M.: Sulle matrici espressioni analitiche di un'altra. Rend. Circ. Mat. 
Palermo 56, 144-154. 
3. WEITZENBÖCK, R.: Über die Matrixgleichung X2=A. Proc. Kon. Ned. Acad. 
Wet. 35, 157-161. 
4. RuTHERFORD, D. E.: On the canonical form of a rational function of a matrix. 
Proc. Edinb. Math. Soc. (2) 3, 135-143. 
5. TuRNBULL, H.W., and A.C. AITKEN: Canonical Matrices. London. 
6. LAMB, H.: Hydrodynamics, 6th. ed. Cambridge. 
1933 1. KLoTTER, K.: Über die graphische Darstellung zugeordneter Spannungs- und 
Verzerrungszustände. Z. angew. Math. Mech. 13, 433-434. 
1934 
1936 
1937 
1939 
1940 
1941 
1942 
1943 
1944 
1945 
2. McDuFFEE, C. C.: The Theory of Matrices. Berlin. 
3. NADAI, A.: Theories of strength. Trans. Amer. Soc. Mech. Engrs. 55, APM-55-15, 
1. 
2. 
1. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
1. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1. 
1. 
1. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1. 
2. 
111-129. 
DANTZIG, D. VAN: Electromagnetism, independent of metrical geometry 3. Mass 
and motion. Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wet. 34, 643-652. 
WEDDERBURN, J. H.M.: Lectures on Matrices. Amer. Math. Soc. Coll. Pub!. 17. 
HAMEL, G.: Ein allgemeiner Satz über den Druck bei der Bewegung volumbeständiger Flüssigkeiten. Mh. Math. Phys. 43, 345-363. 
The Origin of CLERK MAXWELL's electric ideas, as described in familiar letters 
to WILLIAM THOMSON, ed. by J. LARMOR. Cambridge. 
NADAI, A.: Plastic behavior of metals in the strain-hardening range, Part I. J. 
Appl. Phys. 8, 205-213. 
MuRNAGHAN, F. D.: Finite deformation of an elastic solid. Amer. J. Math. 59, 
235-260. 
GuEST, J.J.: A graphical construction for stress. Phi!. Mag. (7), 27, 445-448. 
FRITSCHE, B.: Die Spannungsellipse. Ing.-Arch. 10, 427-429. 
EISENHART, L. P.: Introduction to Differential Geometry. Princeton. 
WEYL, H.: The method of orthogonal projection in potential theory. Duke Math. 
J. 7, 411-444. 
FADLE, J.: Über eine zweckmäßige Darstellung des Mohrsehen Spannungskreises 
zur unmittelbaren Auffindung sämtlicher Spannungs-Richtungspfeile. Ing.-Arch. 
11, 319-322. 
WISE, J.A.: Circles of strain. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 7, 438-440. 
BALLABH, R.: Superposahle fluid motions. Proc. Benares Math. Soc. (2) 2, 69-79. 
MuNK, M.: On some vortex theorems of hydrodynamics. J. Aeronaut. Sei. 5, 
90-96. 
HALM OS, P. R.: Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces. Princeton. 
SIGNORINI, A.: Trasformazioni termoelastiche finite. Memoria 1 a. Ann. di Mat. 
(4) 22, 33-143. 
THOMAS, T. Y.: The Concept of Invariance in Mathematics. Berkeley. 
THOMAS, T. Y.: Sudaces of maximum shearing stress. J. Math. Phys. 23, 167-172. 
DuPONT, P.: Representation triangulaire du tenseur des constraintes en elasticite. 
C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 218, 778-780. 
EINSTEIN, A., and V. BARGMANN: Bivector fields. Ann. of Math. {2) 45, 1-14. 
EINSTEIN, A.: Bivector fields Il. Ann. of Math. (2) 45, 15-23. 
EsNAULT-PELTERIE, R.: L' Analyse Dimensionelle. Lausanne. 
CHARREAU, A.: Sur des representations planes du tenseur des constraintes dans un 
milieu continu. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 220, 642-643. 
3. 
1946 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1947 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1948 1. 
2. 
3. 
1949 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
1950 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
1951 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
1952 1. 
2. 
3. 
1953 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
References. 857 
REINER, M.: A mathematical theory of dilatancy. Amer. J. Math. 67, 350-362. 
DoRGELO, H.B., and J.A. ScHOUTEN: On unities and dimensions. Proc. Kon. Ned. 
Akad. Wet. 48, 124-131. 
WEYL, H.: The Classical Groups, Their lnvariants and Representations. Princeton. 
ToRRE, C.: Über den plastischen Körper von PRANDTL. Zur Theorie der Mohrsehen 
Grenzkurve. Öst. Ing.-Arch. 1. 36- SO. 
CARSTOIU, I.: Sur Je vecteur tourbillon de l'acceh~ration et !es fonctions qui s'y 
rattachent. Bull. Cl. Sei. Acad. Roumaine 29, 207-214. 
MICHAL, A. D.: Matrix and Tensor Calculus. New York. 
BRAND, L.: Vector and Tensor Analysis. New York. 
JuNG, F.: Der Culmannsche und der Mohrsehe Kreis. Öst. Ing.-Arch. 1, 408-410. 
DEWULF, N.: Cercle de Mohr et coniques d'elasticite. Houille bl. 2, 481-487. 
CASTOLDI, L. : Sopra una proprieta dei moti permanenti di fluidi incomprimibili 
in cui Je linee di corrente formano una congruenza normale di linee isotache. Rend. 
Accad. Lincei (8) 3, 333-33 7. 
PRIM, R. C.: On doubly-laminar flow fields having a constant velocity magnitude 
along each stream-line. U.S. Naval Ordnance Lab. Mem. 9762. 
BYUSHGENIS, S.: Geometry of steady flow of an ideal incompressible fluid [in 
Russian]. Isv. Akad. Nauk, SSSR., Ser. Mat. 12, 481-512. 
BALLABH, R.: On coincidence of vortex and streamlines in ideal liquids. Ganita 1, 
1-4. 
EINSTEIN, A.: Autobiographisches. From ALBERT EINSTEIN; Phi!osopher Scientist, 
New York. 
SYNGE, J. L., and A. ScHILD: Tensor Calculus. Toronto. 
TRUESDELL, C.: Deux formes de Ia transformation de Green. C. R. Acad. Sei., 
Paris 229, 1199-1200. 
TRUESDELL, C.: Generalisation de Ia formnie de Cauchy et des theoremes de Helmholtz au mouvement d'un milieu continu quelconque. C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 227, 
7 57-7 59. 
BERKER, R.: Sur certaines proprietes du rotationnel d'un champ vectoriel qui 
est nul sur Ia frontiere de son domaine de definition. Bull. Sei. Math. (2) 73, 163 to 
176. Abstract C. R. Acad. Sei., Paris 228, 1630-1632. 
NEMENYI, P., and R. PRIM: Some properties of rotational flow of a perfect gas. Proc. 
Nat. Acad. Sei. Wash. 34, 119-124. Erratum, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. Wash. 35, 116. 
SIGNORINI, A.: Trasformazioni termoelastiche finite. Memoria za. Ann. di Mat. 
(4) 30, 1-72. 
OLLENDORF, F.: Die Welt der Vektoren. Vienna. 
GREEN, A. E., and W. ZERNA: Theory of Elasticity in General Coordinates. Phi!. 
Mag. (7) 41, 313-336. 
LANGHAAR, H.L.: Dimensional Analysis and the Theory of Models. New York. 
NADAI, A.: Theory of Flow and Fracture of Solids, Vol. 1, 2nd ed. New York. 
ScHOUTEN, J. A.: Tensor Analysis for Physicists. Oxford. 
TRUESDELL, C.: Vorticity averages. Canad. J. Math. 3, 69-86. 
TRUESDELL, C.: A form of GREEN's transformation. Amer. J. Math. 73, 43-47. 
BJORGUM, 0.: On Beltrami vector fields and flows, Part I. Univ. Bergen Arbok 1951, 
Naturv. rekke No. 1. 
FRAGER, W., and P. G. HoDGE jr.: Theory of Perfectly Plastic Solids. New York. 
TORRE, C.: Über die physikalische Bedeutung der Mohrsehen Hüllkurve. Z. angew. 
Math. Mech. 31, 275-277. 
CoBURN, N.: lntrinsic relations satisfied by the vorticity and velocity vectors in 
fluid flow theory. Michigan Math. J. 1, 113-130. 
TRUESDELL, C.: The mechanical foundations of elasticity and fluid dynamics. J. 
Rational Mech. Anal. 1, 125-300. 
PRIM, R. C.: Steady rotational flow of ideal gases ( 1949). J. Rational Mech. Anal. 
1. 425-497-
MusKHELISHVILI, N.l.: Some Basic Problems of the Mathematical Theory of 
Elasticity, trans. by J. R. M. RADOK, Groningen. 
TRUESDELL, C.: The physical components of vectors and tensors. Z. angew. Math. 
Mech. 33, 345-356. 
BJ0RGUM, 0., and T. GoDAL: On Beltrami vector fields and flows, Part II. Univ. 
Bergen Arbok 1952, Naturv. rekke No. 13. 
TRUESDELL, C.: Corrections and additions to "The mechanical foundations of 
elasticity and fluid dynamics". J. Rational Mech. Anal. 2, 593-616. 
858 
1954 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7 . 
1955 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
1956 1. 
1958 1. 
2. 
J. L. ERICKSEN: Tensor Fields. 
GREEN, A.E., and W. ZERNA: Theoretical Elasticity. Oxford. 
TRUESDELL, C.: The Kinematics of Vorticity. Bloomington. 
TRUESDELL, C. : Remarks on the paper "The physical components of vectors and 
tensors". Z. angew. Math. Mech. 34, 69-70. 
SCHOUTEN, J. A.: Ricci-Calculus. Berlin. 
RIVLIN, R. S., and J. L. ERICKSEN: Stress-deformation relations for isotropic 
materials. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 4, 323-425. 
TRUESDELL, C.: The Kinematics of Vorticity. Bloomington. 
BJ0RGUM, 0.: On the analytic representation of Beltrami vector fields (17 x v = 
.Qv). Proc. Internat. Congr. Math. Amsterdam 2, 323-324. 
DoYLE, T. C., and J. L. ERICKSEN: Nonlinear elasticity. Adv. Appl. Mech. 4, 
53-115. 
TouPIN, R.A.: The elastic dielectric. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 5, 849-915. 
NoLL, W.: On the continuity of the solid and fluid states. J. Rational Mech. Anal. 
4, 3-81. 
BoRDONI, P. G.: Limitazioni per gli invarianti di deformazione. Rend. Mat. e Appl. 
(5) 14, 269-279-
CASTOLDI, L.: Rappresentazioni equivalenti di moti stazionari di fluidi incomprimibili con congruenza normale di linee di corrente. In particolare: moti quasi-Euleriani. 
Rend. Sem. Fac. Sei. Univ. Cagliari 25, 32-43. 
ERICKSEN, J.L.: Stress deformation relations for solids. Canad. J. Phys. 34, 
226-227. 
DoYLE, T. C.: Higher order invariants of stress or deformation tensors. J. Math. 
Phys. 36, 297-305. 
GoDAL, T.: On Beltrami vector fields and flows, Part III. Some considerations 
on the general case. Univ. Bergen Arbok 1957, Naturv. rekke Nr. 12, 28 pp. 
Sachverzeichnis. 
(Deutsch-Englisch.) 
Bei gleicher Schreibweise in beiden Sprachen sind die Stichwörter nur einmal aufgeführt. 
abgeschlossene Gleichungssysteme, closed systems of equations 232. 
abgeschlossenes System, closed system 9. 
absolute Dimensionen, absolute dimensions 
799-801. 
absolute Lage, absolute position 6. 
absolute Temperatur, absolute temperature 
652. 
absolute Zeit, absolute time 6. 
absoluter Raum, absolute space 6, 43. 
Absoluttensor, absolute tensor 661. 
Achse der Scherung, axis of shear 292. 
Achsen, bewegte, moving axes 29. 
adiabatisch s. auch isentrop, adiabatic see also 
isentropic. 
adiabatischer Prozeß, adiabatic process 644. 
Änderung des Volumens an einer Stoßfront, 
change of volume at a shock 521. 
Äolotropie, aeolotropy 70G-701. 
Äquipräsenzprinzip, equipresence principle 
703-704. 
Äquivalenz von Oberflächen- und Raumquellen, equivalence of surface and volume 
sources 469. 
der Verzerrungsmaße, of strain measures 
268-269. 
Ätherrelationen von MAXWELL und LORENTZ, 
aether relations of Maxwell and Lorentz 
660, 677-683. 
äußere Belastung, extrinsic load 536. 
Affinität, affinity 643, 646. 
Airysche Spannungsfunktion, Airy's stress 
function 583. 
akkumulierendes Material, accumulative material 733-'-734, 740. 
Aktion und Reaktion, action and reaction 3 7. 
allgemeiner Erhaltungssatz, general conservation law 468. 
Ampere-Lorentzsches Prinzip, A mpere-Lorentz principle 683. 
Amperescher Äquivalentstrom, Amperian 
equivalent current 686. 
anholomone Komponenten, anholonomic components 311, 801. 
anisotrope Festkörper, anisotropic solids 314 
bis 315. 
antisymmetrischer Tensor, antisymmetric tensor 66o-662. 
Aphel, aphelion 51. 
Appellsehe Bewegungsgleichungen, Appell's 
equations of motion 63. 
Appellscher Satz über Wirbellinienstreckung, 
Appell' s theorem on vortex line sireiehing 
429-430. 
Apsiden periodischer Bahnen, apsides of 
periodic orbits 50, 51. 
Arbeit, work 42. 
-, wiedergewinnbare, recoverable 639, 641 
bis 642. 
astatische Belastung, astatic load 5 74. 
Atomgewicht, atomic weight 473. 
Auflösung einer Verschiebung mit kleinen 
Gradienten, resolution of a displacement 
with small gradients 306. 
Ausdehnungskoeffizient, thermischer, thermal 
expansion coefficient 623. 
axiale k-Vektordichte, axial k-vector density 
661. 
axialer Relativtensor, axial relative tensor 
661. 
axialer Tensor, axial tensor 795. 
Axiomatik, axiomatics 5. 
Axiom der Kontinuität, axiom of continuity 
243, 325. 
Axiome und Experimente, axioms and experiments 228-230. 
Bahn, parabolische, parabolic trajectory 48. 
Bahnen, trajectories 107, 111, 121, 134, 
215. 
Bahnkurve, path line 33G-333, 340. 
Ballistik, äußere, exterior ballistics 48. 
barotrope Strömung, barotropic flow 388, 
712. 
Bedingungen der Kompatibilität für die Deformationen, conditions of compatibility 
for strain 271, 307. 
- in gekrümmten Räumen, in curved 
spaces 351-352. 
- für Streckung, for sireiehing 3 51. 
Begriffe, concepts 3, 6, 98. 
Beobachter, bewegter, moving observer 443. 
Bernoullische Sätze, Bernoullian theorems 
402-409. 
Bernoullischer Satz der klassischen Hydrodynamik, Bernoulli' s theorem of classical 
hydrodynamics 402-403. 
Bertrandscher Satz, Bertrand's theorem 97. 
344. 
Berührungsbelastungen, contact loads 536. 
Berührungstransformation, contact Iransformation 124, 144. 
860 Sachverzeichnis. 
Beschleunigung, acceleration 26, 30, 201. 
-, d' Alembert-Eulersche Bedingung, d'Alembert-Euler condition 388. 
-, Formel von D' ALEMBERT und EULER, 
d'Alembert-Euler formula 374. 
-, Formeln zwischen den Komponenten, intrinsic formulae 375-376. 
-, Hankel-Appellsche Bedingung, HankelAppell condition 388. 
- höherer Ordnung, of higher order 383, 439 
to 440. -, Lagrangesche Formel, Lagrange's formula 
377- -. physikalische Komponente, physical component 27. 
Beschleunigungsenergie, acceleration energy 
63. 
beschleunigungslose Bewegung, accelerationless motion 432-433. 
beschleunigungslose homogene Bewegung, 
accelerationless homogeneous motion 434 
bis 436. 
Beschleunigungsmaße, measures of acceleration 378-379. 
Beschleunigungspotential, acceleration potential 389. 
Beschleunigungsvektor, acceleration vector 
140, 201 f. 
- in vier Dimensionen, in four dimensions 
461. 
Beschleunigungswelle, acceleration wave 523 
bis 524. 
Beständigkeit der Wirbellinien und Wirbelröhren, permanence of vortex lines and 
tubes 387-389. 411. 
Betrag der Scherung, amount of shear 293. 
bewegtes Dielektrikum, Materialgleichungen, 
moving dielectric, constitutive equations 
738-739. 
Bewegung, motion 240, 325-463. 
Bewegungen, dreidimensionale, three-dimensional motions 53. -, eindimensionale, one-dimensional motions 
46, 210. -, zweidimensionale, two-dimensional motions 
48. 
Bewegungsebene, plane of motion 329. 
Bewegungsgleichungen (s. auch unter CAuCHY und EuLER), equations of motion 
(see also under Cauchy and Euler) 6, 7, 43, 
65. 203. 
Bezeichnungen für Ableitungen in der Thermodynamik, notation for derivatives in 
thermodynamics 622. 
in der Feldtheorie, in field theory 235 bis 
239. 
Bezugssystem, frame of reference 25. 71, 78, 
200, 218, 241, 246-247. 325. 
-,bevorzugtes, preferred frame 443. 
-, bewegtes, moving frame of reference 30, 
45. 68, 200. 
-, mitrotierendes, co-rotational frame 444 bis 
446. 
-, rotationsfreies, irrotational frame 446 bis 
447. 
Biegemoment, bending couple 566. 
Biegsamkeit, vollkommene, perfect flexibility 
565. 
Biegung, bending 300---302. 
Bilanz zwischen Deformation und Rotation, 
balance between deformation and rotation 
397-399. 
Bilanzgesetze, balance laws 232. 
Bilanzgleichungen in Integralform, balance 
equations in integral form 594. 
Bindungsenergie, binding energy 218. 
Bj0rgumscher Wirbelmittelwertssatz, Bjfwgum's vorticity average theorem 400. 
Bogenelement, Deformation, deformation of 
an element of arc 247-249. 
-,materielle Ableitung, material derivative 
of an element of arc 341-342. 
Boussinesqsche Konstruktion, Boussinesq's 
construction 253. 
Brachistochrone 48. 
Brechungsindex, index of refraction 740. 
Brillouinsches Prinzip, Brillouin's principle 
703-704. 
Bruch, fracture 510. 
Carnotsches Theorem, Carnot's theorem 96. 
Cauchysche Bewegungsgleichungen, Anwendungen, Cauchy's laws of motion, applications 568-607. 
- im Raumzeitkontinuum, in space-time 
554. 
Cauchysche erste Bewegungsgleichung, Cauchy's first law of motion 545-546, 556, 
568, 652. 
Cauchysche Fundamentalsätze der Verformung und Drehung, Cauchy' s fundamental 
theorems on strain and rotation 259--261, 
274. 277-280. 
Cauchysche quadratische Form des Spannungstensors, Cauchy' s stress quadric 5 52. 
Cauchysche Sätze über die Drehgeschwindigkeit, Cauchy's theorems on spin 354-355. 
Cauchysche Wirbelformel, Cauchy's vorticity 
formula 421. 
Cauchysche zweite Bewegungsgleichung, Cauchy's second law of motion 546, 652. 
Cauchyscher Deformationstensor, Cauchy's 
deformation tensor 257-274, 282, 370. 
Cauchyscher Fundamentalsatz über den 
Spannungstensor, Cauchy's fundamental 
theorem on the stress tensor 543, 595. 
Cauchyscher Reziprozitätssatz der Spannungen, Cauchy's reciprocal theorem on 
stress 547. 
Cauchyscher Satz über den Spannungsvektor, Cauchy's lemma on the stress vector 543. 
Cauchyscher Spannungstensor, Cauchy's 
stress tensor 54 3. 
Cauchysches Elastizitätsgesetz, Cauchy's law 
of elasticity 724. 
Cauchysches Spannungsellipsoid, Cauchy's 
stress ellipsoid 5 52. 
Cauchy-Stokesscher Fundamentalsatz über 
Bewegungen, Cauchy-Stokes fundamental 
theorem on motion 362. 
Sachverzeichnis. 861 
Cayley-Kleinsche Parameter, Cayley-Klein 
parameters 21, 22. 
charakteristische Kurven, Methode, characteristic curves, method 124, 529. 
Chaslesscher Satz, Chasles' theorem 14. 
chemische Deutung der Massenbilanz im 
heterogenen Medium, chemical interpretation of mass balance in the heterogeneaus 
medium 473--474. 
chemisches Potential, chemical potential 621, 
636, 638, 648-649. 
Christofielsehe Stoßwellenbedingung, Christofiel condition for shock waves 711. 
Christoffel-Symbole, Christofiel symbols 26, 
109, 804. 
Clebsch-Transformation, Clebsch's Iransformation 424-427. 
Compton-Effekt, Campton effect 220. 
Coriolis-Beschleunigung, Coriolis acceleration 
30. 438. 462. 
Corioliskraft, Coriolis force 4 5. 
Coulomb-Hopkinsscher Satz über die maximale Schubspannung, Coulomb-Hopkins' 
theorem on maximum shearing stress 551, 
845-846. 
Coulomb-Streuung, Coulomb scattering 77. 
d'Alembert-Eulersche Bedingung für die Beschleunigung, d'Alembert-Euler condition 
for the acceleration 388. 
d' Alembert-Eulersche räumliche Kontinuitätsgleichung, d'Alembert-Euler spati"al 
continuity equation 467. 
d' Alembert-Eulersche Wirbelgleichung, 
d' A lembert-E uler vorticity equation 413. 
d'Alembertsche Bewegungen, d'Alembert motions 432. 
d' Alembertscher Wirbelsatz für ebene Bewegung, d'Alembert's vorticity theorem for 
plane motion 421. 
d' Alembertsches Prinzip, d'Alembert's principle 57. 59, 96, 532. 
d' Alembertsches Strömungspotential, 
d'Alembert's stream function 474. 
de Broglie-Wellen, de Broglie waves 215, 
216. 
Deformation (s. auch Verformung) 243-325. 
- eines orientierten Körpers, deformation of 
an oriented body 311. 
Deformationen, Zusammensetzung, strain 
composition 282-283. 
Deformationsenergie, strain energy 571, 598 
bis 599. 641-642. 
- und innere Energie, and internal energy 
611-612. 
Deformationsgeschwindigkeit, rate of strain 
369---374. 
Deformationsgeschwindigkeitstensor, rate of 
deformation tensor 348. 
Deformationsgradienten, deformation gradients 245-249. 
Deformationstensor, strain tensor 266. 
von CAUCHY, of Cauchy 257-274, 282, 
370. 
von GREEN, of Green 257-274. 370. 
Deformationstheorie, historische Bemerkungen, strain theory, historical remarks 270 
bis 271. 
deformiertes Material, deformed material 244. 
Dehnung, stretch 255-256, 257, 26ü-262, 
266-267, 274. 
-, endliche, finite stretch 369. 
Deviationsgleichung, deviation, equation 141. 
Deviationsmomente, products of inertia 31, 
486. 
Deviator 834. 
- der Streckung, of stretching 349. 
Dichte, density 342. 
des magnetischen Flusses, of magnetic flux 
672. 
der Masse, of mass 465. 
der Polarisation, of polarization 685. 
Dielektrikum mit elastischen Eigenschaften, 
dielectric with elastic properlies 742-744. 
-, Materialgleichungen, constitutive equations 
736-740. 
dielektrische Verschiebung, electric displacement 674. 
dielektrischer Verschiebungsstrom, current of 
dielectric convection 686. 
Differentiation, äußere, exterior differentiation 
165. 
differentielle Form der Generalbilanz, differential form of general balance 468. 
Diffusion in einem Gemenge, diffusion in a 
mixture 705-708. 
-,Kinematik, kinematics 469. 
von Streck- und Drehgeschwindigkeit, 
of stretching and spin 38ü-381 
der Wirbelstärke, of vorticity 409---430, 
441. 
der Zirkulation, of circulation 441. 
Diffusionsgeschwindigkeit, diffusion velocity 
470. 
Diffusionsgleichung, diffusion equation 706. 
Dilatation, 350. 431. 
- des Volumens, strain of volume 266. 
Dimension der Wirkung, dimension of action 
698. 
dimensioneile Invarianz, dimensional invariance 701-702. 
- Transformation, Iransformation 798. 
Dimensionen elektromagnetischer Größen, 
dimensions of electromagnetic quantities 
671, 672, 68o-681, 698-699. 
von Energiegrößen, of energy quantities 
615. 
der Entropie, of entropy 620. 
der Temperatur, of temperature 619. 
direktes Produkt, cross product 662. 
Direktoren eines orientierten Körpers, directors of an oriented body 311. 
Direktorgradient, director gradient 312. 
dissipative Systeme, dissipative systems 185. 
dissipativer Spannungsanteil, dissipative 
stress 571, 640. 
divergenzfreies Feld, solenoidal field 819 bis 
824, 827. 
Doppelquelle, doublet 334. 
Doppeltensor, double tensor 242, 805. 
862 Sachverzeichnis. 
Doppeltensorgleichungen, double tensor equations 246. 
Drehbeschleunigung erster und höherer Ordnung, spin of higher order 384-385. 
Drehgeschwindigkeitstensor von CAUCHY, 
spin tensor of Cauchy 353-360, 441. 
- für starre Bewegung, of rigid motion 355. 
Drehimpuls, angular momentum 34, 44, 56, 
66, 213, 221, 482. 
-, Erhaltungssatz, conservation of angular 
momentum 692-693, 697. 
Drehimpulsbilanz, balance of moment of momentum 531-532, 546, 554, 692-693, 
697-
Drehmoment, torque 531. 
-, das von einem festen Hindernis ausgeübt 
wird, exerted by a rigid obstacle 540. 
drehsymmetrisch s. rotationssymmetrisch, 
axially symmetric see rotationally symmetric. 
Drehung, rotation 12, 15, 17, 20, 23, 25, 36, 
104. 
-, endliche, finite 274-283. 
-, infinitesimale, infinitesimal 25, 27. 
-,kleine, small 305-308. 
- um einen Punkt, about a point 13. 
dreiachsiger Spannungszustand, tri-axial 
stress 551. 
dreidimensionale Bewegung, Strömungspotential, three-dimensional motion, stream 
function 479-480. 
Dreikörperproblem, three-body problem SO. 
Drillmoment, twisting moment 566. 
Druck, pressure 537, 545. 
Druckkoeffizient, pressure coelficient 623. 
dualer Tensor, dual of a tensor 661. 
Dualitätsprinzip, duality principle 513. 
-, erstes, first 242, 246. 
-, zweites, second 263. 
dünner Körper, thin body 309. 
Duhemsche Beschleunigungsformel, Duhem' s 
acceleration formula 378, 425. 
Dynamik, dynamics 1, 2, 3, 8, 108, 198, 204. 
-, geometrische Darstellungsweisen, geometrical representations 98. 
-, bei konstanter Energie, isoenergetic 100, 
136. 
des starren Körpers, of rigid bodies 56 ff., 
65. 
eines Teilchens, of a particle 4 3. 
von Teilchensystemen, of particle systems 56ff. 
dynamische Bedingungen an einer singulären 
Fläche, dynamical conditions at a singular 
surface 545-547. 
dynamische Theorie, allgemein, generat dynamical theory 98. 
dynamisches Wirbelmaß, dynamical vorticity 
number 379-
ebene Bewegung, plane motion 329, 430. 
-, Strömungspotential, stream function 
474-477. 
-, Wirbelsatz von d' ALEMBERT, vorticity 
theorem of d'Alembert 421. 
ebene gleichförmige Scherungsbewegung, 
simple shearing 360, 432. 
Ebene der Scherung, plane of shear 292. 
ebener Spannungszustand, plane stress, 582 
bis 584. 
ebener Verformungszustand, plane strain 
284-285. 
Eichtransformation, gauge Iransformation 
669, 675-
Eigenfrequenzen, eigenfrequencies 2, 81. 
Eigentheorie der Verformung, intrinsic theory 
of strain 314. 
Eigenvektor, proper vector 829. 
Eigenwerte eines Tensors, proper numbers of 
a tensor 829. 
Eigenzeit, proper time 6, 200. 
Eikonal, two-point characteristic function 11 7 
bis 121, 131, 137, 138. 
-, vierdimensionales, two-event characteristic 
function 209. 
Einbettungstheorie der Verformung, imbedding theory of strain 314. 
eindimensionale Bewegung, Iineal motion 329, 
430, 584. 
einfache Dehnung, simple extension 291-292. 
einfache Scherung, simple shear 292-296. 
einfache Zugspannung, simple tension 551. 
einfacher Schubspannungszustand, simple 
shearing stress 5 51. 
Einfang, capture 71, 72, 73. 
Einfangquerschnitt, capture cross section 7 5. 
Einheit der Ladung, unit of charge 666. 
Einheitstransformation, unit Iransformation 
660. 
EINSTEINS allgemeine Relativitätstheorie, 
Einstein' s generat theory of relativity 2. 
Einzelkraft s. Punktbelastung. 
elastischer Spannungszustand, elastic stress 
571. 
elastischer Stoß, elastic collision 95, 219. 
elastisches Ä thermodell, elastic aether model 
727-730. 
elastisches Dielektrikum, elastic dielectric 7 42 
bis 744. 
Elastizität, lineare, linear elasticity 723-727. 
elektrische Feldstärke, electric field ( strength) 
672. 
elektrisches Potential, electric potential 674. 
elektromagnetische Energie, electromagnetic 
energy 689. 
elektromagnetische Erhaltungssätze, electromagnetic conservation laws 689--700. 
elektromagnetische Feldgleichungen, dreidimensionale Form, electromagnetic field 
equations, three-dimensional form 676-677. 
-, vierdimensionale Form, jour-dimensional form 669. 
elektromagnetische Integralgesetze, dreidimensionale Form, electromagnetic integral 
laws, three-dimensional form 673-674. 
-, vierdimensionale Form, jour-dimensional form 667. 
elektromagnetische Materialgleichungen, 
electromagnetic constitutive equations 736 
bis 742. 
Sachverzeichnis. 863 
elektromagnetischer Impuls, electromagnetic 
momentum 689. 
elektromagnetischer Spannungstensor, electromagnetic stress tensor 689. 
elektromagnetisches Feld, electromagnetic 
field 667. 
-, Analogie zum quasielastischen Äther, 
analogy with quasi-elastic aether 729. 
-, axialsymmetrisches, axially symmetric 54. 
-, Wechselwirkung mit Materie, interaction with matter 692-693. 
Elektromagnetismus, linearer, linear electromagnetism 233. 
Elektromechanik, Materialgleichungen, electromechanics, constitutive equations 742 
bis 744. 
elektromotorische Intensität, electromotive 
intensity 672. 
Elektronenmikroskop, electron microscope 
54. 
elektrostatisches Feld, electrostatic field 213. 
Elongation, elongation 256-268. 
-, Hauptachsen, principal axes 281. 
Elongationstensor, elongation tensor 267-268 
endliche Drehung, finite rotation 274-283. 
Energie, allgemeine Theorie, energy, general 
theory 607-615. 
- des elektromagnetischen Feldes, of the 
electromagnetic field 689. 
-, gesamte, total 44, 49, 57. 58. 63, 
136. 
-,kinetische, kinetic 35, 36, 39, 44, 365-369. 
377. 402, 482-491. 
-,potentielle, potential 42, 210, 212, 571. 
-, Reduktion auf Normalform, reduction to 
normal form 180. 
Energieabfluß, efflux of energy 609. 
Energiebilanz, balance of energy 607-615, 
691-697-
in heterogenem Medium, in a heterogeneaus medium 612-614. 
in vierdimensionaler Tensorform, worldtensor form of energy balance 611. 
Energieerhaltung unter Einschluß des elektromagnetischen Feldes, energy conservation, including electromagnetic fields 691 
bis 698. 
Energieerzeugung, spezifische, supply of 
energy 609. 
Energiefläche, energy surface 143. 620. 
Energiefunktion, energy function 143. 
Energiegleichung, energy equation 58, 60, 
109, 207. 212, 215. 
Energie-Impuls-Raum, space of momentum 
and energy 130. 
Energie-Impuls-Vektor, energy-momentum 
vector 110, 114, 202, 696. 
Energieintegral, energy integral 58, 60, 63, 
161, 213. 
Energieminimum, Kelvinscher Satz, energy 
minimum, Kelvins' theorem 368. 
Energiestoß, energy impulse 612. 
Energieübertragung, nicht-mechanische, nonmechanical trans/er of energy 608. 
Energie-Zustands-Raum, space of states and 
energy 100, 143. 169. 
Entartung in der Mechanik, degeneracy in 
mechanics 180, 183, 191. 
- in der Thermodynamik, in thermodynamics 633-634. 
Enthalpie, enthalpy 627. 
Entropie, allgemeine Theorie, entropy, general theory 615-64 7. 
Entropiebegriff, entropy concept 616. 
Entropieerzeugung, production of entropy 
638-647. 
Entropieungleichung, entropy inequality 643 
bis 647. 
Ereignisraum, space of events 105. 
Erhaltung der Energie unter Einschluß des 
elektromagnetischen Feldes, conservation 
of energy, including electromagnetic fields 
691-698. 
des Flusses, of flux 346-347. 
der Ladung, of charge 660, 667. 
des magnetischen Flusses, of magnetic 
flux 660, 667. 
der Masse, of mass 464, 466-474. 
- in einem heterogenen Medium, of mass 
in a heterogeneaus medium 472. 
der mechanischen Energie, of mechanical 
energy 572-573. 
Erhaltungssätze, conservation laws 232. 
Ertel-Rossbyscher Konvektionssatz, ErtelRossby convection theorem 414. 
Ertelsche Vertauschungsformel, Ertel commutation formula 413. 
Ertelscher Potentialsatz, Ertel's potential 
theorem 423. 
Ertelscher Zirkulationssatz, Ertel's theorem 
on circulating motions 424. 
erzeugende Funktionen, generafing functions 
146, 169. 
Erzeugung, supply 468-469. 4 72. 
euklidischer Raum, Euclidian space 241. 
euklidisches Bezugssystem, Euclidean frame 
455. 670. 
euklidisches Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum und Kinematik, Euclidean space-time and kinematics 453. 454-455 
Euler-d' Alembertsches Paradoxon, Eulerd'Alembert paradox 541-542. 
Euler-d' Alembertsches Prinzip, Eulerd'Alembert principle 532. 
Euler-Ertelsche Wirbelsätze, Euler-Ertel vorticity theorems 413-414. 
Euler-Lagrange-Gleichungen, Euter-Lagrange equation 107, 204, 206. 
Eulersche Beschleunigung, Euler acceleration 
438. 
Eulersche Bewegungsgleichung für Flüssigkeiten, Euler's dynamical eq~tation for 
fluids 710. 
Eulersche Divergenzformel, Euler's expansion 
formula 342, 347. 373. 
Eulersche Gleichungen des starren Körpers, 
Euler's equations forarigid body 67, 705. 
Eulersche Grundgleichungen, Euler's laws of 
classical mechanics 530, 531. 
864 Sachverzeichnis. 
Eulersche materielle und räumliche Kontinuitätsgleichungen, Euler's material and 
spatial continuity equations 467. 
Eulersche Parameter, Eulerian parameters 
17, 20, 21, 22, 24, 28. 
Eulersche Winkel, Eulerian angle 18, 22, 24, 65. 
Eulerscher Satz über Potentialströmung, 
Euler's theorem on irrotational motion 359. 
Eulerscher Trägheitstensor, Euler's tensor of 
inertia 485, 490, 573. 
Eulersches Diagramm für die Thermodynamik, Euler's diagram in thermodynamics 
623. 
Eulersches Kriterium für isochore Bewegung, 
E uler' s criterion for isochoric motion 34 3. 
- - für starre Bewegung, for rigid motion 
350. 
Eulersches Theorem über die Verschiebung 
auf Kugelflächen, Euler's theorem on 
spherical surface displacements 13. 
Exaktheit einer Theorie, exactness of theory 
231-232. 
Expansionswelle, expansive wave 524, 525. 
Experimente und Axiome, experiments and 
axioms 228-230. 
Explosion eines Teilchens, explosion of a 
particle 217f. 
extensive Variable, extensive variable 647. 
Extremale, extremal 123. 
Extremaleigenschaften von Tensoren, extremal properlies of tensors 845. 
Extremal-Normale, transversal 123. 
Faradaysches Induktionsgesetz, Faraday's 
law of induction 674. 
Feld, kontinuierliches, continuous field 227. 
Feldgleichungen, field equations 232, 233. 
-, elektromagnetische, in drei Dimensionen, 
of electromagnetism in three dimensions 676 
bis 677. 
-, -, in vier Dimensionen, in four dimensions 669. 
Fere!sches Gesetz, Ferel's law 55. 
feste Randfläche der Bewegung, stationary 
boundary of motion 330. 
Ficksches Gesetz der Diffusion, Fick's law of 
diffusion 706. 
Figuratrix 116. 
Fingerscher Satz über Deformation und Drehung, Finger's theorem on strain and rotation 278. 
Finslerscher Raum, Finster space 106. 
Fläche, Bernoullischer Satz für eine, superficial Bernoulli theorem 407-408. 
- konstanten Krümmungsmaßes, surface of 
constant curvature 590. 
-, materielle, material surface 339--340. 
Flächen maximaler Scherung eines Tensorfeldes, surfaces of maximum shear of a 
tensor field 848, 8 SO. 
Flächendilatation, deformation of areas 263. 
Flächenelement, Deformation, surface element, deformation 247-249, 263. 
-, materielle Ableitung, material derivative 
341-342. 
Flächenmetrik, surface metric 811. 
Flächentheorie, surface theory 812-813. 
Fließen, yield 722. 
Fließfunktion, yield function 722. 
Fließspannung, yield stress 722. 
Fluß, invarianter zeitlicher, in vier Dimensionen, invariant time flux in four dimensions 459. 
-, zeitlicher, mitgeschleppter, convected time 
flux 448--452. 
-, -, im mitrotierenden Bezugssystem, corotational 445. 451-452. 
Fluß eines Tensorfeldes, flux of a tensor field 
815. 
Formänderungsarbeit, strain energy 571. 
Fortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit, speed of Propagation 508--509, 514. 
- einer Stoßfront, of a shock 521. 
Foucaultsche Pendeldrehung, Foucault rotation 53, 56. 
Foucaultsches Pendel, Foucault's pendulum 
ss. 
Fouriersches Gesetz der Wärmeleitung, Fourier's law of heat conduction 709--710, 719. 
freie Energie, free energy 627. 
freie Enthalpie, free enthalpy 627. 
freie Ladung, free charge 684. 
Freiheitsgrade, degrees of freedom 38. 
Frequenz, frequency 179. 180, 182. 
Fresnelscher Mitführungskoeffizient, Fresnel's dragging coefticient 739. 
fundamentale Identitäten zwischen Verformungsinvarianten, fundamental identities 
for strain invariants 26 5. 
Fundamentalidentität für heterogene Medien, 
fundamental identity for heterogeneaus media 471. 
Fundamentalsatz der Verformung von Schalen, fundamental theorem on strain of shells 
322-323. 
- der Zerlegung einer Bewegung, of motion 
decomposition 362. 
Fundamentalsätze der Verformung von CAuCHY, fundamental strain theorems of Cauchy 259--261, 274, 277-280. 
Funktionen von Matrizen, functions of matrices 838--840. 
Galileischer Beobachter, Galilean observer 
200. 
Galileisches Bezugssystem, Galilean frame of 
reference 200, 456. 
Galileisches Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum und Kinematik, Galilean space-time and kinematics 453, 455-456, 461. 
Galileisches Relativitätsprinzip, Galilean 
principle of relativity 491, 535. 
Galilei-Invarianz, Galilean invariance 491. 
Galilei-Transformation, Verallgemeinerung, 
Galilean transformation, generalization 681. 
Gasmischungen, kinetische Theorie, gas 
mixtures, kinetic theory 567-568, 612 bis 
614. 
Gaußscher Satz, Green's Iransformation 815 
bis 816. 
Sachverzeichnis. 865 
Gauß-Weingartensche Gleichungen, GaussWeingarten equations 812. 
Gefäß, Einwirkung seines Inhalts darauf, 
vessel, reaction of its content upon it 539. 
gegenseitige Belastungen, mutual loads 536. 
gegenseitige Kräfte, mutual forces 533-534. 
gekrümmte Linie, Bernoullischer Satz für 
eine, curvilinear Bernoulli theorem 406 bis 
407. 
Generalbilanz, general balance 468. 
- an einer Unstetigkeitsfläche, at a discontinuity surface 526-527. 
generalisierte Koordinaten im Raum-ZeitKontinuum, general co-ordinates in spacetime 453. 
generalisierte Scherung, generalized shear 297. 
generalisierter Konvektionsvektor, generalized convection vector 416-41 7. 
geometrische Bewegungsklassen, geometrical 
motion classes 328-329, 43G-431. 
geometrische Darstellung des Spannungszustandes, geometrical represenlation of 
stress 552. 
- von Tensoren, of tensors 25G-255. 
geometrische Mechanik, geometrical mechanics 
98, 215. 
geradlinige Scherungsbewegung, rectilinear 
shearing 36G-361, 432. 
geradlinige Wirbelbewegung, rectilinear vortex 
361-362, 389, 432. 
Gesamtenergie, total energy 609. 
Gesamtentropie, total entropy 642. 
Geschichte der Dynamik, history of dynamics 
1. 
der Feldbeschreibung der Bewegung, of 
field description of motion 327. 
der Theorie der Deformationsgeschwindigkeit, of stretching and shearing theory 
349. 
- der Drehgeschwindigkeit, history of 
the theory of spin 356. 
geschlossener Weg, circuit 103, 104, 156, 814. 
- -, irreduzibler, irreducible 103, 104, 122. 
Geschwindigkeit, velocity 6, 25, 200, 201, 
328. - einer Fläche, speed of a surface 676. 
-,physikalische Komponenten, velocity, 
physical components 26. 
- der Verschiebung einer Fläche, speed of 
displacement of a surface 498-499, 506. 
Geschwindigkeiten, Zusammensetzung, velocities, composition 202. 
Geschwindigkeitsbetrag, speed 25, 201, 216, 
328. 
Geschwindigkeitsfeld in vier Dimensionen, 
velocity field in four dimensions 456-457. 
Geschwindigkeitsgradient in vier Dimensionen, velocity gradient in four dimensions 
461. 
Geschwindigkeitspotential, velocity potential 
357- -, Lagrange-Cauchyscher Satz, theorem of 
Lagrange and Cauchy 421, 712. 
Geschwindigkeitsquadrat, totales, total 
squared speed 365-369. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 
Geschwindigkeitsvektor, velocity vector 139, 
200, 201. 
Gesetze der klassischen Mechanik, laws of 
classical mechanics 531. 
Gibbs-Duhemsche Gleichung, Gibbs-Duhem 
equation 648. 
Gibbssche Gleichung der Thermodynamik, 
Gibbs equation of thermodynamics 621, 
635-638. 
Gibbssches Diagramm, Gibbs' diagram 620. 
Gibbssches Potential, Gibbs function 628. 
Gitterschwingungen, lattice vibrations 81. 
gleichförmige Dilatation, uniform dilatation 
290-291. 
Gleichgewicht von Schalen, equilibrium of 
shells 556-564. 
- von Stäben, of rods 564-567. 
-,thermodynamisches, thermodynam1:c 647 
bis 660. 
Gleichgewichtskonfigurationen, equilibrium 
con figurations 180, 182. 
Gleitebene, shearing plane 292. 
Gleitfläche, slip surface 512. 
Gleittensor, slippage tensor 372-373. 
Greenhilisehe Beschleunigungsformel, Greenhill's acceleration formula 378. 
Greenscher Deformationstensor, Green's deformation tensor 257-274, 370. 
Grenzflächen, boundaries 51G-512. 
Griolischer Satz für homogenen Verformungszustand, Grioli's theorem for homogeneous strain 290. 
Gromeka-Beltramische Sätze über Schraubenbewegungen, Gromeka-Beltrami theorems on screw motion 392-393, 418. 
Grundgleichungen der Thermodynamik, fundamental equations of thermodynamics 
628. 
Gwyther-Finzische Spannungsfunktionen, 
Gwyther-Finzi stress functions 585-587. 
Hadamardscher Satz über singuläre Flächen, 
H adamard' s lemma on singular surfaces 
492-493. 
Haften der Substanz an einer Oberfläche, 
adhering of material to a surface 386, 394 
bis 396, 401. 
HAMILTON's Zweipunktcharakteristik oder 
Hauptfunktion, H amilton' s two-point characteristic or principal function 11 7, 120, 
137. 209. 
Hamiltonsche Dynamik, Hamiltonian dynamics 112, 113, 204. 
Hamiltonsche Fläche, Hamiltonian surface 
116. 
Hamiltonsche kanonische Gleichungen, Hamilton's canonical equations 62, 63, 110, 
207. 
Hamiltonsche Methode, Hamiltonian method 
2, 3. 
- - in der Optik, Hamilton's method in 
optics 107, 110, 117, 131. 
Hamiltonsche partielle Differentialgleichungen, Hamilton's partial differential equations 119. 
55 
866 Sachverzeichnis. 
Hamiltonsche relativistische Dynamik, Hamiltonian relativistie dynamies 204-206. 
Hamiltonsche Wirkung, H amiltonian aetion 
110, 204, 205. 
Hamiltonscher Dreier-Impuls, Hamiltonian 
three-momentum 21 3. 
Hamiltonscher Vierer-Vektor (des Impulses), 
H amiltonian four-veetor ( of momentum) 
205. 215. 
Hamiltonsches Prinzip, Hamilton's prineiple 
107. 110, 204, 205. 604-605. 
Hamilton-Funktion, H amiltonian function 
62, 109. 110, 206, 213, 214. 
Hamilton-Jacobische Gleichung, Hamilton-
]acobi equation 117-120, 122, 125, 130, 
138. 157. 170. 175. 209. 213, 215. 
Hankel-Appellsche Bedingung für die Beschleunigung, Hankel-A ppell eondition for 
the aeeeleration 388. 
haqnonische Schwingung, karmanie oseilla-
(ion 529. 
harmonischer Oszillator, karmanie oseillator 
46, 210. 
Hauptachsen der Elongation, prineipal axes 
of elongation 281. 
der quadratischen Form eines Tensors, 
of a tensor quadrie 251. 
für Torsionsbiegung, prineipal torsionflexure axes 318. 
des V erformungszustandes, prineipal axes 
of strain 260, 274. 281. 
Hauptachsensystem eines Tensors, prineipal 
co-ordinate system of a tensor 832. 
Hauptdehnungen, prineipal stretehes 261. 
Hauptdehnungen, kleine, small prineipal extensions 303-308. 
- einer Scherung, prineipal extensions of a 
shear 294. 
Hauptinvarianten eines Tensors, prineipal 
invariants of a tensor 832-836. 
Hauptkrümmungen, prineipal eurvatures 
813. 
Hauptspannungen, prineipal stresses 551. 
Hauptspannungsachsen, prineipal axes of 
stress 5 51. 
Hauptstreckungen, prineipal Stretchings 349, 
441. 
Hauptträgheitsachsen, prineipal axes of 
inertia 32, 33. 36, 485-486. 
Hauptträgheitsmomente, prineipal moments 
of inertia 32, 33. 485. 
Haupttrajektorien eines Tensorfeldes, prineipal trafectories of a tensor field 84 7. 
Helmholtz-Föpplsche Formel, HelmholtzFöppl formula 366. 
Helmholtz-Zorawskisches Kriterium, Helmholtz-Z orawski eriterion 341. 
Helmholtzscher dritter Wirbelsatz, Helmholtz's third vorticity theorem 389. 410. 
Helmholtzscher erster Wirbelsatz, Helmholtz' s first vortieity theorem 386-387. 
Helmholtzscher zweiter Wirbelsatz, Helmlw/tz' s seeond vorticity theorem 389, 
409. 
Herpolhodie, herpolhode 83, 85. 
heterogene Medien, heterogeneaus media 469 
bis 474. 567-568, 612-614, 634-638. 
645-650. 
-, Erhaltung der Masse, conservation of 
mass 472. 
-, Fundamentalidentität, fundamental 
identy 471. 
Himmelsmechanik, eelestial mechanies 2. 
Hodograph 26. 
Höldersches Prinzip, H ölder' s prineiple 139. 
holonome Zwangsbedingungen, holonomic 
constraints 600-602. 
holonomes System, holonomic system ( see also 
non- and semi-holonomic) 38. 60. 
homogene Bewegung, homogeneaus motion 
434-436. 
homogene Dilatation eines Kreiszylinders, 
inflation of a circular eylinder 299---300. 
- - einer Kugel, of a sphere 302. 
homogener Verformungszustand, homogeneaus strain 285-298. 
homogener Zustand in der Thermodynamik, 
homogeneaus state in thermodynamics 
647-650. 
Homogenität und Isotropie des Raums und 
Raurn-Zeitkontinuums als Axiom, homogeneity and isotropy of space and spacetime, axiom 9. 10. 
Hookesches Gesetz, Hooke's law 724. 
Hugoniot-Duhemscher Satz über die Verrückungsgeschwindigkeit, Hugoniot-Duhem theorem on the speed of displacement 
5ü6. 
Hugoniotscher Satz über Schallwellen, Hugoniot' s theorem on sound waves 712. 
Huygenssche Konstruktion, Huygens' construction 123. 
hydrostatischer Druck, hydrostatie pressure 
549. 574. 
hydrostatischer Spannungszustand, hydrostatic stress 544. 
hyperbolische Bewegung im Raumzeitkontinuum, hyperbolic motion in space-time 
210. 
hyperelastischer Körper, hyperelastie body 
725. 730. 
Hypoelastizität, hypo-elasticity 731-733. 
ideale Flüssigkeit, perfeet fluid 233. 710 bis 
715. 
Ideales Gas, ideal gas 633. 
idealisierte Substanz, ideal material 700. 
Impuls, elektromagnetischer, electromagnetic 
momentum 689. 
-, generalisierter, generalized momentum 62, 
607. 
-, linearer, linear momentum 33. 56, 66, 110, 
481-491. 
Impulsbilanz, balance of momentum 531, 545. 
554, 691-698. 
- in einer Mischung, in a mixture 567. 
Impuls-Energie-Raum, momentum-energy 
space 130. 
Impuls-Energie-Vektor, momentum-energy 
vector 110, 114, 202, 696. 
Sachverzeichnis. 867 
Impulserzeugung in einer Mischung, supply 
of momentum in a mixture 567. 
Impulsmoment, moment of momentum 482. 
Impulsübertragung, transfer of momentum 
549-550. 
lndicatrix 116. 
individuelle Bewegung der Phasen, individual motion of constituents 469. 
Induktionsgesetz von FARADAY, induction 
law of Faraday 674. 
Induktionslinien, induction lines 674. 
Inertialsystem, inertial frame 531, 533. 535. 
555-
infinitesimale Schwingung, infinitesimal oscillation 529. 
infinitesimale Verformungen, historische Bemerkungen, infinitesimal strain, historical remarks 270. 
Inkompatibilität der Bezugskonfigurationen, 
incompatibility of reference configarations 
273-
innere Energie, internal energy 609, 619--620, 
627. 
- - und Deformationsenergie, and strain 
energy 611-612. 
innerer Spannungsanteil, interior part of 
stress 568. 
Integral, erstes, der Bewegung, first integral 
of motion 158, 1 70. 
Integral eines Tensorfeldes, integral of a tensor 
field 808, 813-817. 
Integralform, dreidimensionale, der elektromagnetischen Gesetze, three-dimensional 
integral form of electromagnetic laws 67 3 
bis 674. 
-, vierdimensionale, derelektromagnetischen 
Gesetze, tour-dimensional integral form 
of electromagnetic laws 667. 
Integralinvariante im Phasenraum, relative 
und absolute, relative and absolute integral 
invariant in phase space 15 7, 1 72. 
Intensität eines Tensors, intensity of a tensor 
834. 
Intensitätsbilanz zwischen Deformation und 
Rotation, intensity balance between deformation and rotation 396-397. 
intensive Variable, intensive variable 647-
lnvariante, bilineare, bilinear invariant 
144. 
invariante Integral- und Differentialgleichungen, invariant integral and differential equations 662-666. 
invariante Richtungen einer Bewegung, invariant directions in motion 344-345. 
- - einer Deformation, in a deformation 
280-282. 
invariante Zerlegung, invariant decomposition 
840-842. 
Invarianten des Spannungstensors,invariants 
of stress 5 51. 
der Streckung, of stretching 349. 
eines Tensors, of a tensor 832-836. 
der Vektorlinien, of vector lines 818 bis 
819. 
der Verformung, of strain 264-266. 
Invarianz bezüglich bewegter Beobachter, 
invariance with respect to moving observers 
443. 
-, Galileische, of Galileo 491. 
von Materialgleichungen, of constitutive 
equations 701-703. 
im Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum, in space-time 
452. 
von Streckung und Drehgeschwindigkeit 
bei Relativbewegung, of stretching and 
spin in relative motion 440-441. 
irreduzibler geschlossener Weg, irreducible 
circuit 103, 104, 122. 
Irreversibilität, irreversibility 644. 
irreversible Thermodynamik, irreversible 
thermodynamics 233. 616, 706-707, 734 
bis 735. 
isentroper Weg, isentropic path 624. 
isobare Kompressibilität, isobaric compressibility 623. 
isochore Bewegung, isochoric motion 343 bis 
344. 431, 525. 
isochore Deformation, isochoric deformation 
283. 
isostatische Flächen, isostatic surfaces 84 7 bis 
850. 
isostatische Koordinaten, isostatic co-ordinates 848. 
isotherme Kompressibilität, isothermal compressibility 623. 
isothermer Weg, isothermal path 624. 
isotrope Elastizität, isotropic elasticity 724, 
730. 
isentrope Veränderung, isentropic change 622. 
isotrope V erformungsfunktionen, isotropic 
functions of strain 265, 283. 
Isotropie, isotropy 700. 
der Flüssigkeiten, of fluids 715-716. 
und Homogenität des Raumes und 
Raum-Zeitkontinuums, Axiom, isotropy 
and homogeneity of space and space-time, 
axiom 9, 10. 
-, thermische, thermal isotropy 709. 
Isotropiegruppe, isotropy gro?Np. 701. 
iterierte geometrische Kompatibilitätsbedingungen, iterated geometrical conditions 
of compatibility 496-498. 
iterierte kinematische Kompatibilitätsbedingungen für Unstetigkeiten, iterated kinematical compatibility conditions for discontinuities 505-506. 
J ACOBIS vollständiges Integral der Hamilton-J acobi-Gleichung, J acobi's complete 
integral of the Hamilton-]acobi equation 
125-128. 
Jacobische Gleichung, ]acobi's equation 79. 
Jacobischer Satz, ]acobi's theorem 127, 128. 
J acobisches Prinzip der kleinsten Wirkung, 
]acobi's principle of least action 137. 139. 
Kalorische Zustandsgleichung, caloric equation of state 619--620, 634-635. 
kanonische Gleichungen, canonical equations 
63, 110, 154. 158. 168, 205, 206, 212. 
55* 
868 Sachverzeichnis. 
kanonische Tensorformen, canonical tensor 
forms 842-843. 
kanonische Transformationen, canonical 
Iransformations 144, 154, 157, 166, 169, 
170. 
Katastrophe, relativistische, relativistic catastrophe 21 7. 
Kelvin-Helmholtzscher Satz für Potentialströmung, Kelvin-Helmholtz's theorem on 
irrotational motion 393. 
KELVINS Erweiterung des ersten Wirbelsatzes von HELMHOLTZ, Kelvin's extension 
of Helmholtz's first vorticity theorem 387. 
Kelvinsehe Beweise der Helmholtzschen 
Wirbelsätze, Kelvin's proofs of Helmholtz's 
vorticity theorems 409--410. 
Kelvinscher Satz vom Energieminimum, 
Kelvin's theorem of minimum energy 368. 
- der Hydrodynamik, of hydrodynamics 
711. 
- über Potentialströmung, on irrotational motion 357-358. 
Kelvinscher Stoßsatz, Kelvin's theorem on 
impulsive motion 97. 
Kelvin-Taitscher Satz, Kelvin-Tait theorem 
280. 
Kepler-Problem, Kepler problem 49, 129. 
-, relativistisches, relativistic 213. 
Kinematik kinematics 1, 12, 25. 
der Diffusion, of ditfusion 469. 
kontinuierlicher Medien, of continuous 
media 24ü-530. 
der Linienintegrale, of line integrals 345 
bis 346. 
der Oberflächenintegrale, of surface integrals 346--34 7. 
in Raum und Zeit, in space-time 200. 
der Volumintegrale, of volume integrals 
347. 
kinematische Bewegungsklassen, kinematical 
motion classes 431-432. 
kinematische Kompatibilitätsbedingung für 
Unstetigkeiteri, kinematical compatibility 
condition for discontinuities 503-506, 515. 
kinematisches Linienelement, kinematical 
line element 13, 139. 200. 
kinematisches Wirbelmaß, kinematical vorticity number 363-364. 382, 403-404. 
Kinestat, kinestat~ 383. 
Kinetik, kinetics 1. 
kinetische Energie, kinetic energy 35, 36, 39, 
44. 365-369, 377. 402, 482-491. 
- -, Königsehe Sätze, theorems of König 
36, 65, 484. 
kinetische Gastheorie, kinetic theory of gases 2. 
kinetische Theorie der Gasmischungen, kinetic theory of gas mixtures 567-568, 612 
bis 614. 
Kirchhoffscher S11tz für Potentialströmung, 
K irchhoff' s theorem on. irrotational motion 
394. 
Klassifikation der Räume, classification of 
spaces 100. 
klassische Physik, ihre Definition, classical 
physics, its definition 234. 
kleine Deformation, small deformation 303 
bis 309. 
kleine Deformationen, historische Bemerkungen, small strain, historical remarks 
270. 
kleine Drehung, small rotation 305-308. 
kleine Hauptdehnungen, small principal 
extensions 303-308. 
kleine reine Dehnung, small pure strain 305. 
kleine Verrückung, small displacement 308. 
kleine Verschiebungsgradienten, small displacement gradients 306. 
Kleinheit, Begriffsbestimmung, smallness, the 
meaning of 303, 309. 
Kleinsches Prinzip der Geometrie, Klein's 
principle of geometry 454. 
Königsehe Sätze über die kinetische Energie, 
König's theorems on the kinetic energy 36, 
65, 484. 
Körper, Begriff, body, concept 466. 
Kompatibilitätsbedingungen für eine bewegte 
Fläche, compatibility conditions for a 
moving surface 50ü-501. 
in gekrümmten Räumen, in curved spaces 
351-352. 
-, geometrische iterierte, geometrical iterated 
496--498. 
-,kinematische, für Unstetigkeiten, kinematical, for discontinuities 503-506,515. 
auf singulären Flächen, for singular surfaces 493-494. 
für Streckung, for stretching 3 51. 
des Verzerrungszustandes, for strain 271, 
307. 
komplex-lamellare Bewegung, complex-lamellar motion 390, 400, 417-420, 431. 
komplex lamellares Feld, complex-lamellar 
field 824-825. 
komplex-schraubenartige Bewegung, complex-screw motion 417-418, 431. 
Kompressibilität, compres$ibility 623. 
Kompressionswelle, compressive wave 525. 
Konfigurationsraum, configuration space 2, 
13, 100, 134. 
konservative Kräfte, conservative forces 571. 
konservatives Ii-Vektorfeld, conservative kvector field 665-666. 
konstanter invarianter Tensor, constant invariant tensor 662. 
kontinuierliche Bewegung, continuous motion 
325. 
Kontinuitätsaxiom, continuity axiom 243, 
325. 
Kontinuitätsgleichung, ihre Lösung, continuity equation, its solution 474-481. 
- der Masse, of mass 467. 
-, räumliche, spatial 342, 467. 
- im Raumzeitkontinuum, in space-time 
480. 
Kontinuitätstheorien, ihre physikalische 
Grundlage, continuum theories, physical 
basis 228. 
Kontinuumsmechanik, Grundgesetze, continuum mechanics, fundamental laws 545 
bis 547. 
Sachverzeichnis. 869 
Kontrollf!äche, control surface 540. 
Kontrollmechanismus, automatischer, servomechanism 65. 
Konvektion einer Größe, convection of a 
quantity 337. 
Konvektionssätze für Wirbelbewegung, convection theorems for vorticity 413-421. 
Konvention hinsichtlich der Beschreibung 
einer Bewegung, convention regarding 
description of motion 338. 
über Punktbelastungen, on concentrated 
loads 539. von Streckung und Drehgeschwindigkeit, 
of stretching and spin 380-381. 
der Wirbelstärke, of vorticity 409-430. 
Konzentration, concentrat'ion 470. 
Koordinaten, krummlinige, coordinates, curvilinear 25, 26, 43. 
-, materiefeste, material 326. 
-,mitgeschleppte, convected 457. 460. 
-, raumfeste, spatial 326. 
-, verallgemeinerte, generalized 38, 59. 
-,zyklische, ignorable 58, 61, 102, 176, 179, 
191. 
Koordinatenschemata für die Bewegung, COordinate schemes of motion 327. 
Koordinatensysteme, überlappende, overlapping co-ordinate systems 103. 
Koordinatentransformation, co-ordinate Iransformation 164. 
Ratschinseher Satz über singuläre Flächen, 
Kotchine's theorem on singular surfaces 
527. 
kovariante Ableitung, partielle, covariant 
derivative, partial 794, 804. 
- -,totale, total 246-247, 810-813. 
kovariante Differentiation, covariant differentiation 811, 813. 
- - eines Doppeltensorfeldes, of a double 
tensor field 809. 
Kowalewskisches Integral, Kowalewski's integral 86. 
Kräfte, äußere, external forces 37. 
-, effektive, effective forces 57. 
-,innere, internal forces 37. 
-,verallgemeinerte, generalized forces 42. 
Kräftepaar, couple 531, 536. 
Kräftepaardichte, assigned couple 538. 546. 
Kraft, force 1, 6, 531. 
-, die von einem festen Hindernis ausgeübt 
wird, exerted by a rigid obstacle 540. 
Kraftdichte, assigned force 537. 
Kraftsysteme, force systems 3 7. 
Kreisel, aufrichtendes Drehmoment, gyroscopic couple 91. 
-,rotierender, spinning top 85. 
-, schwerer, barygyroscope 92. 
-, symmetrischer, symmetrical top 85. 87, 88. 
-,unsymmetrischer, unsymmetrical top 85. 
Kreiselbewegung, Steifheit, gyroscopic stiffness 90. 
Kreiselkompaß, gyrocompass 90, 91. 
Kreiselstabilität, gyroscopic stability 185. 
Kreisfrequenzen, circular frequencies 180, 812. 
Kreispendel, circular pendulum 47. 
Kreiszylinder, typische Deformationen, circular cylinder, typical deformations 299 
bis 300. 
Kroneckersches Deltasymbol, Kroneckerdelta 
26. 
Krümmung, geringste, least curvature 141 bis 
143. 
- von Stromlinien, curvature of streamlines 
376. 
Kugelkoordinaten, spherical polar co-ordinates 27. 
Kugelpendel, spherical pendulum 47, 52, 56. 
Kugeltensor, spherical tensor 834. 
k-Vektor, k-vector 661. 
k-Vektordichte, k-vector density 661. 
k-Vektorfeld, k-vector field 675. 
Laborsystem, laboratory system 71. 
Ladung, Definition, charge, definition 666. 
-, Erhaltung, conservation 660, 667. 
- und Strom als Fundamentalgrößen, and 
current as fundamental entities 683. 
Ladungsdichte, charge density 672. 
Ladungsgleichung, charge equation 674. 
Ladungspotential, charge potential 674. 
Längendilatation s. Streckung, stretch. 
Längskraft, stress resultant 56 5. 
Lagrangesche Ableitung, Lagrangian derivative 107. 
Lagrangesche Anordnung beim Dreikörperproblem, Lagrange's particles (three-body 
problem) So. 
Lagrangesche Dynamik, Lagrangian dynarnies 108, 113, 204. 
Lagrangesche Fläche, Lagrangian surface 116. 
Lagrangesche Form der relativistischen Dynamik, Lagrangian form of relativistic 
dynamics 204. 
Lagrangesche Gleichungen, Lagrange's equations 58. 59. 93, 107, 109, 204ff., 208. 
Lagrangesche Wirkung, Lagrangian action 
105, 107. 
Lagrangesche Zentralgleichung, Lagrangian 
centrat equation 604. 
Lagrangesches Kriterium für eine materielle 
Fläche, Lagrange' s criterion for a material 
surface 339. 509. 
Lagrange-Cauchyscher Satz für Potentialströmung, Lagrange-Cauchy theorem on 
irrotationalflow 421, 712. 
Lagrange-d' Alembertsches Prinzip, Lagranged'Alembert principle 595-600. 
Lagrange-Funktion, Lagrangian 44, 60, 
105-106, 208, 212. 
-,homogene, homogeneaus 105. 137-139, 
204. 212. 
Lagrange-Hamilton-Übereinstimmung, Lagrange-Hamiltonian correspondence 115. 
Lagrange-Klammern, Lagrange brackets 1 51 , 
170. 
Lagrange-Matrix, Lagrange matrix 152. 
Lambsche Ebene, Lamb plane 404-405. 
Lambsche Fläche, Lamb surface 404-405. 
Lambsche Kurve, Lamb curve 405. 
Lambscher Vektor, Lamb vector 378, 402. 
870 Sachverzeichnis. 
Lambscher Wirbelmittelwertssatz, Lamb's 
vorticity average theorem 399. 
Lamb-Masottische Form des Bernoullischen 
Satzes, Lamb-Masotti form of Bernoulli's 
theorem 408. 
lamellares Beschleunigungsfeld, lamellar acceleration field 388. 
lamellares Feld, lamellar field 824-825. 
Lamesche quadratische Form des reziproken 
Spannungstensors, Lame's stress director 
quadric 552. 
Lamescher Schubspannungskegel, Lame's 
cone of shearing stress 552. 
Lamesches Spannungsellipsoid, Lame's stress 
ellipsoid 5 52. 
Laplacescher Ausdruck für die Schallgeschwindigkeit, Laplacian expression for 
the speed of sound 657. 713. 
latente Wärme, latent heat 625. 
Le Chatelier-Braunsches Prinzip, Le Chatelier-Braun principle 659. 
Leistung, power 44, 569-570. 
- äußerer Arbeit, external 638. 
-, nicht-mechanische, non-mechanical 608. 
Leitungsstrom, conduction current 672. 
Libration 103. 
Lichtgeschwindigkeit im Dielektrikum, velocity of light in a dielectric 739. 
- im Vakuum, in vacuum 679. 
Lichtkegel, null cone 199. 
Liesche Ableitung, Lie derivative 449. 458, 
460, 501. 
Iineale Bewegung, lineal motion 329, 430, 
584. 
linear elastischer Körper, linearly elastic 
body 723-727. 
linear-viskose Flüssigkeit, linearly viscous 
fluid 715-720. 
lineare Bilanz zwischen Deformation und Rotation, linear balance between deformation 
and rotation 397-399-
Linie, materielle, material line 339. 
Linienelement, kinematisches, kinematical 
line element 13, 139, 200. 
- der Wirkung, line element of action 139. 
Linienintewal. Bernoullischer Satz, line integral, Bernoulli theorem 405-406. 
- der Geschwindigkeit, flow along a curve 
357. 
Linienintegrale, Kinematik, line integrals, 
kinematics 34 5-346. 
Linienintegral eines Tensorfeldes, flow of a 
tensor field 814. 
Liouvillescher Satz, Liouville's theorem 172 
bis 174. 
Liouvillescher Typ, System vom, system of 
Liouville type 129. 
Lissajoussche Figuren, Lissafous figures 52. 
lokale Fortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit, local 
speed of Propagation 508, 513. 
lokale Starrheit, local rigidity 259. 
longitudinale Beschleunigungswelle, longitudinal acceleration wave 524. 
longitudinale Unstetigkeit, longitudinal discontinuity 492. 
Longitudinalwelle im elastischen Körper, 
lo:-~gitudinal wave in an elastic body 726 
bis 727. 
lorenczinvariante Erhaltungssätze, world inVllriant conservation laws 695-697. 
lorentzinvariante Form der Cauchyschen 
Bewegungsgleichungen, world invariant 
form of Cauchy's laws of motion 555. 
lorentzinvariante Materialgleichungen eines 
bewegten Dielektrikums, Lorentz invariant constitutive equations of a moving 
dielectric 738-739. 
Lorentz-Invarianz der elektromagnetischen 
Theorie, Lorentz invariance of electromagnetic theory 681. 
Lorentz-Kraft, Lorentz force 212, 690. 
Lorentz-Transformation, eigentliche und uneigentliche, Lorentz transformation, proper 
and improper 10, 14, 198, 199. 200, 
682. 
magnetische Feldstärke, magnetic field intensity 674. 
magnetische Flußdichte, magnetic flux density 
672. 
magnetische Flußlinie, line of magnetic flux 
674. 
magnetische Induktion s. magnetische Flußdichte, magnetic induction see magnetic 
flux density. 
magnetischer Fluß, magnetic flux 667. 
- -,Erhaltung, conservation 660, 667. 
magnetisches Potential, magnetic potential 
674. 
Magnetisierung, magnetization 683, 685 bis 
686. 
Magnetohydrodynamik, magnetohydrodynamics 744. 
Mainardi = Codazzi-Gaußsche Gleichungen, 
Mainardi = Codazzi-Gauss equations 812. 
Masse, mass 240. 
-, Definition und Dimension, definition and 
dimension 464. 
-, Erhaltungssatz, conservation law 464, 
466-474. 
-, Erhaltungssatz für ein heterogenes Medium, conservation in a heterogeneous medium 472. 
-,reduzierte, reduced 71, 72, 73. 
- und Ruhmasse, and proper mass 6, 202, 
203, 219. 
Massendichte, mass density 465. 
Massengeschwindigkeit, mass velocity 467. 
Massenmittelpunkt, (s. auch Schwerpunkt), 
mass center 31, 221, 481, 532. 
Massenpunkt, mass-point 465. 532. 
- und Schwerpunkt, and center of mass 483. 
Massenstromdichte, mass flow 467. 
Massenverteilung, mass distribution 31. 
Massenverteilungen gleicher Trägheitsmomente, equimomental mass distributions 
33. 
maßtheoretische Bedeutung der Masse, measure theoretical meaning of mass 465. 
Material 243. 
Sachverzeichnis. 871 
Materialgleichungen, constitutive equations 
232, 233. 
-, allgemeine Eigenschaften, generat properlies 70(}-704. 
-, elektromagnetische, of electromagnetic materials 736---742. 
der Elektromechanik, for electromechanics 
742-744. 
eines starren Körpers, of a rigid body 704 
bis 705. 
Materialkonstanten, material constants 701. 
materiefeste Koordinaten, material coordinates 326, 337-339. 
materielle Ableitung. material derivative 337 
bis 339. 341-343. - - im Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum, world material derivative 463. 
materielle Darstellung einer Unstetigkeitsfläche, material representation of a surface 
of discontinuity 506---528. 
materielle Fläche, material surface 339---340, 
51(}-512. 
materielle Kontinuitätsgleichung, material 
equation of continuity 467. 
materielle Linie, material line 339. 
materielle singuläre Flächen, material singular 
surfaces 519. 
materielle Vektorlinie, material vector line 
34(}-341. 
materieller Difftisionsvektor, material diffusion vector 3 81. 
materielles Volumen, material volume 339. 
materielles Wirbelblatt, material vortex sheet 
515-517. 
mathematische Begriffsbildung in der Physik, 
mathematical concepts in physics 231. 
Mathieusche kanonische Transformation, 
Mathieu's canonical Iransformation 148. 
Matrizen, orthogonale, orthogonal matrices 
15, 199. 
Matrizenfunktion, matrix function 838-840. 
Matrizenpolynom, matrix polynomial 838. 
Maupertuissches Prinzip, Maupertuis action 
137. 
Maximalspannungen, maximum stress 5 77 bis 
580. 
Maximum-Minimum-Wirbelsätze, maximumminimum theorems for vorticity 403-404. 
Maxwellsehe Flüssigkeit, M axwellian fluid 
735. 
Maxwellsehe Konstruktion der Stromlinien, 
Maxwell's construction of stream-lines 475. 
Maxwellsehe Relationen der Thermodynamik, 
Maxwell' s relations of thermodynamics 
629. 
Maxwellscher Satz über Unstetigkeiten, Maxwell' s theorem on discontinuities 494. 
Maxwellsches Dielektrikum, M axwellian dielectric 736---740. 
Maxwell-Batemansche elektromagnetische 
Grundgesetze, Maxwell-Bateman laws of 
electromagnetism 66 7. 
Maxwell-Lorentzsche Ätherrelationen, M axwell-Lorentz aether relations 660, 677 bis 
683. 
Maxwell-Morerasche Spannungsfunktionen, 
Maxwell-Morera stress functions 587. 
Mechanik, Axiome der, axioms of mechanics 
230. 
-, geometrische, geometrical mechanics 98, 
215. 
- in nichteuklidischen Räumen, mechanics 
in non-Euclidean spaces 606---607. 
mechanisches Gleichgewicht einer Mischung, 
mechanical equilibrium of a mixtu1·e 
650. 
Membran, membrane 556. 
-, Spannungsfunktionen, stress functions 
589---592. 
Membranspannungszustand, membrane stress 
558, 560. 
Metrik in einer Fläche, metric in a surface 
811. 
Miesehe elektromagnetische Theorie, Mie's 
electromagnetic theory 7 41 . 
Milnes kinematische Kosmologie, M ilne' s 
kinematical cosmology 2. 
minimale Spannungsintensität, Sätze von 
PRATELLI, minimum stress intensity, theorems of Pratelli 603. · 
Minimalsätze beim Stoß, minimal theorems 
in impulsive motion 96. 
Minkowskische Koordinaten, Minkowskian 
coordinates 208, 209. 
Minkowskische Raum- und Zeit-Koordinaten, 
Minkowskian space and time coordinates 
198, 199. 208, 209. 
Mischungen, mixtures 469---474, 567-568, 
612-614, 634-638, 645-650. 
mitgeschleppte Koordinaten, convected Coordinates 4 57, 460. 
mitgeschleppter Fluß, convected time flux 
448-452, 675. 
mitrotierender Fluß, co-rotational time flux 
445. 451-452. 
mitrotierendes Bezugssystem, co-rotational 
frame 444-446. 
Mittelwerte der Spannung, mean values of 
stress 568-569, 574-580. 
mittlerer Druck, mean pressure 545. 
Modelle, mathematische, der Natur, mathematical models of nature 3, 8, 231. 
Mohrscher Kreis für einen Tensor, circle diagram of Mohr for a tensor 253-254. 
Mohrscher Spannungskreis, circle diagram of 
Mohr for stress 5 52. 
Molekulargewicht, molecular weight 473. 
momentaner Raum, instantaneous space 457. 
Moment einer Kraft, moment of force 531. 
-, lineares, linear moment 31. 
-, quadratisches, quadratic moment 31. 
Momente der Spannungskomponenten, moments of stress 576---580. 
- eines Tensorfeldes, of a tensor field 815. 
Mangesehe Potentiale, M onge' s potentials 
828. 
Motor 37, 68. 
Motorrechnung, motor symbolism 68. 
Multiplikation, äußere, exterior multiplication 165. 
872 Sachverzeichnis. 
Nachwirkung als Materialeigenschaft, hereditary materials 733-734, 740. 
Näherungstheorie, approximate theory 231. 
N avier-Poissonsches Viskositätsgesetz, Navier-Poisson law of viscosity 716. 
Newtonsches Gravitationsgesetz, Newton's 
law of gravitation 8. 
Newtons Iex prima und Iex secunda, Newton's first and second law 43, 45. 
Newtons Iex tertia, Newton's third law 9. 10, 
37. 38, 57. 533-534. 
Newtonsehe absolute Zeit, Newtonian absolute time 4. 
Newtonsehe Dynamik, Newtonian dynamics 
1, 2, 3. 108. 
- - eines Systems, of a system 8, 108. 
- - eines Teilchens, of a particle 5. 6. 
Newtonsches Relativitätsprinzip, N ewtonian 
relativity 4 5. 
nicht-holonome Zwangsbedingungen, nonholonomic constraints 606. 
nicht-holonomes System, non-holonomic system 39, 59, 64, 65. 
nichtlinear elastischer Körper, finitely elastic 
body 730. 
nichtlinear viskose Flüssigkeit, non-linearly 
viscous fluid 72ü--722. 
nichtpolarer Spannungszustand, non-polar 
case of stress 538, 546. 
n-Körperproblem, n-body problem 79. 
normale Projektion, normal projection 796. 
Normalformtransformation, normal form 
Iransformation 191. 
Normalfrequenzen, normal frequencies 2, 81, 
182. 
Normalkomponente, normal component 844. 
Normalkomponenten der Verformung, normal strains 267. 
Normalkoordinaten, normal co-ordinates 182. 
Normalmatrix, normal matrix 842. 
Normalschwingungen, normal modes 2, 81, 
180, 182. 
Normalspannung, normal stress 537, 544, 574. 
Normaltensor, normal tensor 810. 
Nulltensor der Spannung, null stress 547. 
Oberfläche, Kraftwirkungen, bounding surface, reaction 539--542. 
Oberflächenintegrale, Kinematik, surface integrals, kinematics 346-347. 
Oberflächenladung, surface charge 683-684. 
Oberflächenstrom, surface current 683-684. 
Ohmsches Gesetz für bewegte Leiter, Ohm' s 
law for moving conductors 741-742. 
Oktaeder-Invariante, octahedral invariant 
834. 
Onsagersche Reziprozitätsbeziehungen, Onsager reciprocity relations 707. 
Operationsverfahren von BRIDGMAN, operational method of Bridgman 4. 
orientierte Körper, oriented bodies 309--325. 
orthogonale Matrizen, Definitionen, orthogonal matrices, definitions 15, 199. 
Oszillator, harmonischer, harmonic oscillator 
46, 210. 
Paradoxon von EDLER und o'ALEMBERT, 
paradox of Eulerand d'Alembert 541-542. 
Parallelverschiebungsoperator, shifter 807. 
Partialenergie, innere, partial internal energy 
613. 
Partialentropie, partial entropy 634. 
Pendel, pendulum 47, 52, 56. 
Pendelkörper, pendulous body 5 76. 
Perihel, perihelion 51. 
Permanenz der Materie, permanence of matter 
243. 
Pfaffsche Form, Pfatfian form 163. 
Phasen mittel, phase average 227. 
Phasenraum, phase space 2, 100, 143, 167, 
191. 
Photon, Frequenz-Vierervektor, photon, frequency four-vector 203, 21 7. 
physikalische Dimensionen, physical dimensions 799. 
physikalische Grundlage der Kontinuitätstheorien, physical basis of continuous 
theories 228. 
physikalische Komponenten eines Tensors, 
physical components of a tensor 799. 802 
bis 805. 
physikalische Spannungskomponenten, physical components of stress 544. 
piezotrope Substanz, piezotropic material634. 
Piola-Kirchhoffscher Spann ungstensor, 
Piola-Kirchhoft stress tensor 553. 
Piolascher Satz über die virtuelle Arbeit, 
Piola's theorem on virtual work 596-597. 
plastisches Fließen, plastic flow 722. 
plastisches Potential, plastic potential 723. 
Plastizität, plasticity 722-723. 
Platte, plate 5 56. 
Poincarescher Wirbelmittelwertssatz, Poincare' s vorticity average theorem 399. 
Poinsot-Ellipsoid, Poinsot ellipsoid 83, 85. 
Poisson-J acobi-Identität, Poisson-J acobi 
identity 151, 1 72. 
Poisson-Kelvinsche äquivalente Ladungsverteilung, Poisson-Kelvin equivalent 
charge distribution 685. 
Poisson-Klammern, Poisson brackets 151,170. 
Poisson-Matrix, Poisson matrix 152. 
Poissonsches Theorem, Poisson theorem 153. 
Polarisation eines Dielektrikums, polarization 
of a dielectric 683-685. 
Polarisationsladung, polarization charge 684. 
Polarisationsstrom, polarization current 685, 
686. 
Polhodie, Polhode 83, 85. 
Polynom aus Matrizen, polynomial of matrices 838. 
Polynome, ineinandergreifende, interlocked 
polynomials, 187. 
Potential eines konservativen Feldes, potential of. a conservative field 665-666. 
Potentialdeformation, potential deformation 
277. 283. 
Potentiale, elektromagnetische, potentials, 
electromagnetic 212, 6 7 4. 
-, thermodynamische, thermodynamic 627 
bis 629. 
Sachverzeichnis. 873 
Potentialströmung, irrotational motion 35 7 
bis 360, 391, 404, 408, 431. 
-, Kelvin-Helmholtzscher Satz, theorem of 
Kelvin and Helmholtz 393. 
-, Kirchhoffscher Satz, theorem of Kirchhotf 
394. -, Satz vom maximalen Geschwindigkeitsbetrag, theorem of maximum speed 404. 
-, Supinasehe Sätze, theorems of Supina 395. 
- hinter einem Zylinder, potential flow past 
a cylinder 332-336. 
Potentialtransformationen, potential Iransformations 666. 
Potentialwirbel, irrotational vortex 362, 432. 
potentielle Energie, potential energy 42, 210. 
potentielle Spannungsenergie, potential 
energy of stress 5 71. 
Potenzen eines Tensors, powers of a tensor 
837. - eines Vektors, of a vector 796. 
Potenzreihe aus Matrizen, power series of 
matrices 838. 
Poynting-Vektor, Poynting vector 690. 
Präzession, gleichmäßige, steady precession 88. 
Prinzip der Äquipräsenz, principle of equipresence 703-704. 
-, erstes, der Dualität, first principle of 
duality 242, 246. 
der kleinsten Wirkung, principle of least 
action 107, 110, 204, 205, 604. 
des kleinsten Zwanges, of least constraint 
605-606. 
von LAGRANGE und n' ALEMBERT, of 
Lagrange and d'Alembert 595-600. 
der Undurchdringlichkeit, of impenetrability 244, 325. 
der virtuellen Arbeit, of virtual work 595 
bis 600. 
- -, seine Umkehrung, its converse 602 
bis 603. 
-, zweites, der Dualität, second principle of 
duality 263. 
Prinzipien für Materialgleichungen, principles for constitutive equations 70(}--704. 
Projektion, stereographische, stereographic 
projection 21, 24. 
pseudo-ebene Bewegung, pseudo-plane motion 
329, 430. 
pseudo-lineale Bewegung pseudo-lineal motion 
329, 430. - -, Strömungspotential, stream function 
477. 
Pseudospannungen, pseudo-stresses 553. 
Punktbelastung, concentrated Ioad 538-539. 
Punkttransformation, point Iransformation 
149. 
quadratische Form des Elongationstensors, 
elongation quadric 268. 
- des Streckungstensors, quadric of 
stretching 349. 
- eines Tensors, quadric of a tensor 
25(}-253. 259. 
quadratische Formen zum Spannungstensor, 
stress quadrics 5 52. 
Quantenmechanik, quantum mechanics 1-3. 
Quaternionen, quaternions 21, 25, 28. 
Quellen und Wirbel als Bewegungselemente, 
sources and vortices as elements of motion 
364-365. 
Quellenäquivalenz, source equivalence 469. 
Querkontraktionszahl, Iransverse contraction 
ratio 291. 
Querkraft, cross force 558. 
Räume, Definitionen und spezielle Arten, 
spaces, definitions and special kinds 100, 
105, 130, 134. 143, 163, 169, 
-, repräsentative (Zusammenstellung), representative (listed) 100, 104. 
räumliche Darstellung einer Unstetigkeitsfläche, spatial representation of a surface 
of discontinuity 506-528. 
räumliche Kontinuitätsgleichung, spatial 
equation of continuity 342, 467. 
räumlicher Bernoullischer Satz, spatial 
Bernoulli theorem 408-409. 
räumlicher Diffusionsvektor, spatial diffusion 
vector 381. 
Randbedingungen, elektromagnetische, in 
drei Dimensionen, boundary conditions of 
electromagnetism in three dimensions 676 
bis 677. 
-,-,in vier Dimensionen, infourdimensions 
669. 
- für den Spannungszustand, boundary conditions for stress 54 3. 
Randfläche der Bewegung, boundary of motion 329-330. 
Rankine-Hugoniotsche Gleichung, RankineHugoniot equation 711, 713. 
Raum, absoluter, absolute space 6, 43. 
-, Energie-Impulsraum, space of momentum 
and energy 130. 
-, Energie-Zustandsraum, space of states and 
energy 100, 143, 169. 
-, Ereignisraum (Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum), 
space of events (space-time) 105. 
-, Finslerscher, Finster space 106. 
-, Konfigurationsraum, configuration space 
2, 13, 100, 134. 
und Raum-Zeitkontinuum; Homogenität 
und Isotropie, space and space-time, homogeneity and isotropy 9, 10. 
-, Riemannscher, Riemannian space 106. 
-, Zustandsraum, space of states 100, 163. 
raumfeste Koordinaten, spatial co-ordinates 
326, 337-339. 
Raummetrik, space metric 455. 
Raumtensor aus Welttensor abgeleitet, space 
tensor derived from world tensor 4 56. 
Raumzeitkontinuum, space-time 105, 666. 
Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum, ebenes, flat spacetime 1. 
-, gekrümmtes, curved space-time 1. 
Raum-Zeit-Punkt, event 5, 453. 
Reduktion von Energien auf Normalform, 
reduction of energies to normal form 180. 
der Ordnung, of order 158, 161, 162, 163, 
170. 
874 Sachverzeichnis. 
Reaktionsgeschwindigkeit, reaction rate 473. 
reduzibler geschlossener Weg, reducible circuit 103, 104. 
reduzierte freie Enthalpie, reduced free enthalpy 638. 
Reibung, friction 85. 
reine Drehung, pure strain 275, 281, 283. 
- -, kleine, small 305. 
reiner Normalspannungszustand, pure normal stress 537-538. 
reiner Schubspannungszustand, pure shearing stress 537. 545, 551. 
Reiner-Rivlinsche Flüssigkeiten, Reiner-Rivlin fluids 72ü--722. 
Relativbewegung, relative motion 437-463. 
relative Drehgeschwindigkeit, relative spin 
353. 441. 
relative Schiefheit eines orientierten Körpers, 
relative wryness of an oriented body 312 bis 
313. 
relativistische Dynamik, relativistic dynamics 
1, 2, 108, 198. 
- eines Systems, of a system 8, 108, 
204. 
- eines Teilchens, of a particle 5. 6, 
198. 
-, Wechselwirkung, interaction 10. 
relativistische Katastrophen, relativistic catastrophes 21 7. 
Relativität, allgemeine, Theorie von ErNSTEIN, generat relativity, theory of Einstein 2. 
Relativitätsprinzip von GALILEI, relativity 
principle of Galileo 491, 53 5. 
-, Newtonsches, Newtonian 45. 
Relativsystem, relative frame 71. 
Relativtensor, relative tensor 661. 
Resonanz, resonance 47, 189. 
reziproke Direktoren, reciprocal directors 311. 
reziproke quadratische Form eines Tensors, 
reciprocal quadric of a tensor 251. 
reziproke Relationen der Thermodynamik, 
reciprocal relations of thermodynamics 629. 
Reziprozitätssatz der Hamiltonschen und 
Lagrangeschen Dynamik, reciprocity theorem of Hamiltonian and Lagrangian dynamics 116. 
rheonomes System, rheonomic system 35, 
39. 
Riemann-Christoffelscher Tensor, RiemannChristoflel tensor 271-273. 
Riemannscher Raum, Riemannian space 106. 
Rivlin-Ericksenscher Tensor, Rivlin-Ericksen 
tensor 383. 
rollende Berührung (ohne Gleiten), rolling 
contacts 38. 
Rotation eines starren Körpers, rotation of a 
rigid body 82, 575. 
- eines Zylinders, of a cylinder 550. 
Rotationsfläche, surface of revolution 591. 
rotationsfreie Bewegung s. Potentialströmung. 
rotationsfreies Bezugssystem, irrotational 
frame 446---44 7. 
rotationsfreies Feld s. lamellares Feld. 
rotationssymmetrische Bewegung, rotationally symmetric motion 329, 431. 
-, Strömungspotential, stream function 
478-479. 
-, Wirbelsatz von SvANBERG, vorticity 
theorem of Svanberg 421. 
rotationssymmetrischer Spannungszustand, 
rotationally symmetric stress 587-588. 
rotierendes starres Bezugssystem, rotating 
rigid frame 437. 
Routhsche Funktion, Routhian function 61. 
Rutherfordsche Streuformel, Rutherford 
scattering formula n. 
Saite, string 565. 
-,belastete, loaded 81, 82. 
Schale, shell 310, 311. 
Schalen, Gleichgewichtszustand, shells, equilibrium state 556---564. 
-,Verformung, strain of 32ü--325. 
Schalentheorie, Zusammenhang mit der dreidimensionalen Theorie, shell theory, relation to three-dimensional theory 56ü--564. 
Schallgeschwindigkeit, speed of sound 657. 
713. 
Schallgeschwindigkeiten im elastischen Körper, speeds of soundinan elastic body 727. 
Schallwellen, Hugoniotscher Satz, sound 
waves, Hugoniot's theorem 712. 
scheinbare Zirkulation bei Relativbewegung, 
apparent circulation in relative motion 442. 
scheinbares Drehmoment, apparent torque 
535. 
Scheinkräfte, fictitious forces ( or apparent) 
4, 45. 535. 
Scheinspannungen, apparent stress 550. 
Scherung, shear 256---257, 258-259, 267. 
-,generalisierte, generalized 297. 
eines Kreiszylinders, of a circular cylinder 
299-300. 
einer Kugel, of a sphere 302. 
-, maximale und minimale, maximum and 
minimum 263. 
Scherungen, Zusammensetzung, shear composition 296. 
Scherungsgeschwindigkeit, shearing 348, 431. 
Scherungskegel eines Tensors, shear cone of 
a tensor 251. 
Scherungskomponenten, shear strains 267. 
- eines Tensors, shear components of a tensor 
844. 
Scherungslinien eines Tensorfeldes, shear 
trafectories of a tensor field 84 7. 
Scherungsstärke, shear intensity 266. 
Scherungsviskosität, shear viscosity 718. 
schiefsymmetrisch s. antisymmetrisch, skew 
symmetric see antisymmetric. 
Schraubenbewegung, screw motion 392-393. 
404, 408, 431. 
Schraubenfeld, screw field 826---828. 
Schrödinger-Gleichung, Schrödinger equation 3. 
Schubkraft, shearing force 566. 
Schubspannung, shearing stress 537, 544. 
-,maximale, maximum 551. 
Sachverzeichnis. 875 
Schubspannungskegel, cone of shearing stress 
552. 
Schwerpunkt, center of mass ( or of gravity) 
31, 221, 481, 532. 
Schwerpunktssatz, center of mass,fundamental 
theorem 483. 
Schwerpunktssystem, center-of-mass frame 
71, 218. 
Schwingung, oscillation 529. 
Schwingungen, erzwungene, forced oscillations 47. 189. -, kleine, small 180. 
- um eine stetige Bewegung, about steady 
motion 191. 
semi-holonomes System, semi-holonomic system 39. 
Separation der Variablen, separation of variables 128, 175. 
Signorinische Spannungsungleichung, Signorini' s stress inequality 5 78. 
singuläre Flächen, allgemeine Klassifikation, 
singular surfaces, generat classification 
517-519. 
-, Bilanzsätze, balance theorems 526 bis 
528. 
-, Definition, definition 492. 
- höherer als zweiter Ordnung, of 
higher order than second 524-525. 
-, Kompatibilitätsbedingungen, compatibility conditions 493-494. 496-498, 
503-506, 515. 
-,materielle, material 519. 
-, Transportsatz, Iransport theorem 525 
bis 526. 
- zweiter Ordnung, of second order 523 
bis 524. 
Singularität der Massendichte, singularity 
mass density 466. 
skleronomes System, scleronomic system 39. 
Spannungen, dissipativer Anteil, stress, dissipative part 5 71, 640. 
-, thermodynamische Definition, thermodynamic definition 651. 
Spannungsdeviator, stress deviator 545. 
Spannungsellipsoide von CAUCHY und LAME, 
stress ellipsoids of Cauchy and Lame 552. 
Spannungsfunktion, stress function 582 bis 
594. 
Spannungsfunktionen für allgemeine Bewegung, stress functions for generat motion 
592-594. 
für ebene Räume, for flat spaces 585 bis 
586. 
für Membranen, for membranes 589-592. 
Spannungs-Impuls-Tensor, stress-momentumtensor 555. 
Spannungskomponenten, Bezeichnungen, 
stress notations 548. 
Spannungsleistung, stress power 570, 638. 
Spannungsmittelwerte, stress means 568 bis 
569, 574-580. 
Spannungsprinzip, stress principle 537-538. 
- für Schalen, for shells 556-557-
- für Stäbe, for rods 565. 
Spannungsstoß, stress impulse 549. 
Spannungstensor, stress tensor 542-544. 
-, elektromagnetischer, electromagnetic stress 
tensor 689. 
-, Invarianten, stress invariants 551. 
-, vierdimensionaler, stress-energy-momentum tensor 696. 
Spannungstrajektorien, stress trafectories 552. 
Spannungsvektor, stress vector 537. 542 bis 
543. 546. 
Spannungs-Verformungs-Beziehungen, stressstrain relations 641. 
Spannungszustand, geometrische Darstellungen, stress, geometrical representations 
552. 
durch Kräftepaare, couple stress 538, 546, 
547. 
spezielle Bewegungstypen, special motion 
types 328-329, 43ü-437-
spezielle Relativitätstheorie, special relativity 
697-698. 
spezifische Energie, Poissonsche Gleichungen, 
specific energy, Poisson equations 402 bis 
404. 
spezifische innere Energie, specific internal 
energy 609. 
spezifische totale innere Energie einer Mischung, total specific inner energy of a 
mixture 634. 
spezifische kinetische Energie, specific kinetic 
energy 3 77, 402. 
spezifische Entropie, specific entropy 619. 
spezifische totale Entropie einer Mischung, 
total specific entropy of a mixture 634. 
spezifische Wärmen, specific heats 624 bis 
627, 63ü-632. - -, generalisierte Theorie, generalized theory 625-627. 
Spinmatrizen, Paulische, spin matrices of 
Pauli 23, 24. 
Sprung, fump 492. 
- in einem Wirbel~eld, of solenoidal field 495. 
Sprungbedingung, jump condition 233. 
Stab, rod 309-310. 
Stabilität, stability 141. 
des Gleichgewichtes, of equilibrium 653 
bis 659. 
eines symmetrischen Kreisels ohne Präzession, of a sleeping top 89. 
Stäbe, Geschichte der Beschreibung ihrer 
Verformung, rods, history of strain description 319-320. 
-, Gleichgewichtszustand, equilibrium state 
564-567. 
-,Verformung, strain of 315-320. 
Staeckel-Typ, System vom, Staeckel type 
system 129. 
Stärke eines Wirbels, strength of a vortex 362, 
387-389, 411. 
Stark-Effekt, Stark-eftect 130. 
starre Bewegung, rigid motion 35ü-352, 355. 
431. 
-, körperfeste Koordinaten, body-fixed 
coordinates 4 86. 
-, lorentzinvariante Definition, worldinvariant definition 4 57. 
876 Sachverzeichnis. 
starre Deformation, rigid deformation 259, 
265, 283. 
- - eines orientierten Körpers, of an 
oriented body 312-313. 
starre Drehung, rigid rotation 274. 
starrer Körper, rigid body 8, 12, 82-92, 233. 
-, Drehung um einen festen Punkt, turning about a fixed point 68, 82-92. 
-, kräftefrei under no forces 82. 
-, Materialgleichungen, its constitutive 
equations 704-705. 
-, Verrückung, displacement 14, 65, 199. 
starres rotierendes Bezugssystem, rigid rotating frame 437. 
stationäre Bewegung, steady motion 328, 339, 
343, 431, 442---443, 467. - - mit stationärer Dichte, with steady 
density 343, 431, 487, 489. 
stationäre Größe, steady quantity 328. 
stationäre Stromlinien, steady streamlines 
341, 431. 
stationäre Wirbelbewegung, steady vorticity 
motion 391, 431. 
stationäre Wirbellinien, steady vortex lines 
391. 
Statik, statics 1. 
statisch bestimmtes Problem, statically determinati problem 58D--582. 
statistische Mechanik, statistical mechanics 
175. 
Stefansche Beziehungen für die Diffusion, 
Stefan's relations for dilfusion 707. 
Steincrseher Satz, theorem of parallel axes 32. 
stereographische Projektion, stereographic 
projection 21, 24. 
stöchiometrische Koeffizienten, stoechiometric coelficients 4 7 3. 
Störungen, perturbations 196. 
Störungsreihen perturbation series 309. 
Stokes-Christoffelsche Bedingung für Stoßwellen, Stokes-Christolfel condition for 
shocks 522. 
Stokessehe Flüssigkeit, Stokesian fluid 721. 
Stokessehe Potentiale, Stokes' potentials 828 
bis 829. 
Stokesscher Satz, Stokes' theorem 356-----357, 
386, 816-----817. 
Stoß, collision 71, 94, 132, 217. 
Stoß, impulse 536. 
-,elastischer, elastic collision 95, 219. 
-, unelastischer, inelastic collision 95, 219. 
Stoßarbeit, impulsive work 92. 
Stoßbewegung, impulsive motion 92. 
Stoßbilanz an einer singulären Fläche, impulsive balance at a singular surface 527 
bis 528. 
Stoßfront, shock surface 514. 
-, Dichteerhöhung, condensation at a shock 
522. 
Stoßkraft, impulsive force 92, 
Stoßmoment, impulsive moment 92. 
Stoßparameter, impact parameter or collision 
Parameter 71 . 
Stoßwelle, shock wave 512-513, 519-522, 
546, 610, 711, 714-715. 
Streckung (Streckgeschwindigkeit), stretching 348, 369. 
und Drehgeschwindigkeit, grundlegende 
Identität, and spin, basic identity 380. 
höherer Ordnung, of higher order 384 bis 
385. 
der Wirbellinien, of vortex lines 429-430. 
Streckungstensor von EuLER, stretching tensor of Euler 347-352. 
Strenge, mathematische, in der Physik, 
mathematical rigor in physics 231. 
Streuquerschnitt, differentieller, differential 
scattering cross section 7 5, 77. 
-,gesamter, total 76. 
Streuung, scattering 71, 76. 
- ohne effektive Ablenkung, zero-scattering 
76. 
Streuwinkel, scattering angle 72. 
Strom und Ladung als Fundamentalgrößen, 
current and charge as fundamental entities 
683. 
Stromblatt, stream sheet 331. 
Stromdichte, current density 672. 
Stromfunktion. stream function 474-481. 
für dreidimensionale Bewegung, for threedimensional motion 479-480. 
für ebene Bewegung, for plane motion 474 
to 477-
- für pseudolineale Bewegung, for pseudolineal motion 477. 
für rotationssymmetrische Bewegung, 
for rotationally symmetric motion 478 bis 
479-
für zweidimensionale Bewegung, for twodimensional motion 477-479-
Stromgleichung, current equation 674. 
Stromlinie, stream line 33D--333. 
Strompotential, current potential 674. 
Struktur, mathematische, der Mechanik, 
mathematical structure of mechanics 98. 
Strukturen, periodische, periodic structures 
81. 
St. Venantsche Kompatibilitätsbedingungen 
für kleine Deformationen, St. Venant's 
compatibility conditions for small strain 
306. 
substantiell s. materiell. 
substantielle Konstante, substantial constant 
339. 
Summationsübereinkunft, summation convention 100. 
Summe von Tensoren, sum of tensors 808. 
superpanierbare Bewegungen, superposable 
motions 396. 
Superpositionssatz für Deformationen, superposition theorem for strain 308. 
Supinosche Sätze für Potentialströmung, 
Supino's theorems on irrotational motion 
395. 
Svanbergscher Wirbelsatz für rotationssymmetrische Bewegung, Svanberg' s vorticity 
theorem for rotationally symmetric motion 
421. 
Symmetrie des Spannungstensors, symmetry 
of the stress tensor 546, 569. 
Sachverzeichnis. 877 
symplektische Transformation, symplectic 
Iransformation 146. 
System, abgeschlossenes, closed system 9. 
-,entartetes, degenerate 179. 183, 191. 
-, holonomes, holonomical 38, 60. 
-, isoliertes, isolated 9. 
-,konservatives, conservative 100, 167. 
- vom Liouville-Typ, of Liouville type 129, 
172. 
-, nicht holonomes, non-holonomic 39. 59. 
64, 65. 
-, nichtkonservatives, non-conservative 170. 
-, rheonomes, rheonomic 35, 39. 
-, semi-holonomes, semi-holonomic 39. 
-, skleronomes, scleronomic 39. 
- vom Staeckel-Typ, of Staeckel type 129, 
172. 
Systeme ohne Zwang, systems without constraints 69---82. 
Szebehelysche Zahl, unsteadiness number of 
Szebehely 379. 432. 
Tangentenvektor, tangent vector 810. 
tangentiale Projektion, tangential projection 
796. 
Tautochrone 48. 
Teilchen, freie, free particles 9. 207, 216, 217. 
-, geladene, in einem elektromagnetischen 
Feld, charged particles in an electromagnetic field 53. 212. 
in einem Potentialfeld, particles in a potential field 210f. 
mit Spin, partie/es with spin 222. 
Teilchenexplosion, parfiele explosion 217 f. 
Teilchengeschwindigkeit, parfiele velocity 216. 
Teilchenpaar als Träger elektrischer Ladung, 
pair of particles carrying electric charge 11. 
Temperatur, temperature 619, 621. 
Tensor der mittleren Drehung, mean rotation 
tensor 275-277. 
Tensorblatt, tensor sheet 84 7. 
Tensoren, geometrische Darstellung, tensors, 
geometrical representation 25ü--255. 
Tensorsumme, tensor sum 808. 
Tensorinvarianten, tensorinvariants 832-836. 
Tensor Iinien, tensor lines 84 7. 
thermische Isotropie, thermal isotropy 709. 
thermische Zustandsgleichung, thermal equation of state 623. 
thermischer Ausdehnungskoeffizient, coetficient of thermal expansion 623. 
thermodynamische Diagramme, thermodynamic diagrams 620, 623. 
thermodynamische Entartung, thermodynamic degeneracy 633-634. 
thermodynamische Identitäten, thermodynamic identities 629---632. 
thermodynamische Intensitätsgrößen, thermodynamic tensions 621. 
thermodynamische Kraft, thermodynamic 
force 643. 
thermodynamische Potentiale, thermodynamic potentials 627-629. 
thermodynamische Ungleichungen, thermodynamic inequalities 652-659. 
thermodynamische Wege, thermodynamic 
paths 624. 
thermodynamischer Druck, thermodynamic 
pressure 621, 636, 638. 
thermodynamischer Fluß, thermodynamic flux 
643, 646. 
thermodynamischer Unterzustand, thermodynamic substate 618-619. 
thermodynamischer Zustand, thermodynamic 
state 620. 
thermodynamisches Gleichgewicht, thermodynamic equilibrium 647-660. 
Thermostatik, thermostatics 615-660. 
topalogische Bemerkungen, topological remarks 102. 
tordierter Spann ungszustand, torsional stress 
588. 
Torsion 298-300, 318. 
eines Kreiszylinders, torsion of a circular 
cylinder 299---300. 
einer Kugel, torsion of a sphere 302. 
der V ektorlinie, abnormality of a field 
400, 819, 825, 826. 
torsionsfreier Spannungszustand, torsionless 
stress 588. 
Torsor 37. 68. 
totale kovariante Ableitung, total covariant 
derivative 246-247, 81ü--813. 
Totale eines Tensorfeldes, total of a tensor 
field 815. 
träge Mischung, inert mixture 472. 
Trägheitsellipsoid, ellipsoid of inertia 33. 
486. 
Trägheitskräfte, forces of inertia 57. 
Trägheitsmomente, moments of inertia 31, 
485-486. 
Trägheitsradius, radius of gyration 31. 
Trägheitstensor, tensor of inertia 485-486, 
490. 
Trajektorien eines Tensorfeldes, trajectories 
of a tensor field 84 7. 
Transformation, Berührungstransformation, 
transformation, contact Iransformation 124, 
144. 
-,kanonische, canonical144, 154, 157. 168, 
169. 170. 
-,kontinuierliche (Definitionen), continuous 
( definitions) 103. 
- in Normalform, in normal form 191. 
-, Punkttransformation (erweiterte). point 
Iransformation ( extended) 149. 
-, symplektische, symplectic 146. 
Translation 12, 274, 350. 
Transportgeschwindigkeit, velocity of Iransport 30. 
Transportsatz, Iransport theorem 347. 
transversale Beschleunigungswelle, Iransverse acceleration wave 524. 
transversale Unstetigkeit, transversal discontinuity 492. 
transversale Welle, Iransverse wave 525. 
Transversalwelle im elastischen Körper, 
Iransverse wave in an elastic body 726 bis 
727. 
truncation nnmber 721. 
878 Sachverzeichnis. 
Umkehrpunkt, stagnation point 328. 
Umkehrung des Prinzips der virtuellen Arbeit, converse of the principle of virtual 
work 602-6o3. 
Ultrastabilität, ultrastability 658. 
unabhängige geschlossene Wege, independent 
circuits 103. 
Unabhängigkeit der Materialgleichungen vom 
Beobachter, material indifference principle 702. 
undeformiertes Material, undeformed material 244. 
Undurchdringlichkeit der Materie, impenetrability of matter 244, 325. 
unelastischer Stoß, inelastic collision 95. 
219. 
Ungleichungen zwischen Tensorinvarianten, 
inequalities between tensor invariants 835 
bis 836. 
-, thermodynamische, thermodynamic inequalities 652-659. 
unimodulare Bedingung, unimodular condition 22, 150. 
U nstetigkeiten, verschiedene Definitionen, 
discontinuities, various definitions 529. 
Unstetigkeitsfläche, surface of discontinuity 
233. 610. 
- s. singuläre Fläche, discontinuity surface 
see singular surface. 
Unstetigkeitstypen, discontinuity types 492. 
untergetauchter Körper, submerged body 540. 
Ursprung klassischer Feldtheorien, origins 
of classical field theories 234. 
van der Waalssches Gas, van der W aals gas 
632-633. 
Variation der Konstanten, variation of constants 197. 
Variationsbedingung des thermodynamischen 
Gleichgewichtes, variational condition of 
thermodynamic equilibrium 650--652. 
Variationsprinzipien der Mechanik, variational principles of mechanics 107, 111, 139, 
594-607. 
Vektor, absolutes und relatives Maß der 
Änderung, vector, absolute and relative 
rates of change 29. 
Vektorblatt, vector sheet 817. 
Vektorlinie, vector line 81 7. 
-,materielle, material 340--341. 
Vektorpotential s. magnetisches Potential, 
vector potential see magnetic potential 6 7 4. 
Vektorröhre, vector tube 817. 
verallgemeinerte Galilei-Transformation, 
generalized Galilean Iransformation 681. 
Verdichtungsgeschwindigkeit, speed of compression 95. 
V erdichtungsperiode, period of compression 
95. 
Verformungs. auch Deformation. 
Verformungsellipsoid, strain ellipsoid 259. 
261. 
Verformungsgröße, strain magnitude 266. 
Verformungsinvarianten, strain invariants 
264-266. 
Verformungszustand, strain 240, 255. 
- der Orientierung, of orientation 313, 314. 
Vergangenheit, past 200. 
Verrückung, infinitesimale, infinitesimal displacement 25, 29. 
- parallel zu einer Ebene, displacement 
parallel to a plane 12, 199. 
Verrückungsableitung, displacement derivative 501-503. 
Verrückungsgeschwindigkeit einer Fläche, 
displacement speed of a surface 498-499. 
506. 
Verrückungsgradienten, kleine, small displacement gradients 306. 
V errückungspotential, displacement potential 
277-
v errückungsvektor, displacement vector 24 7. 
Verschiebung, dielektrische, electric displacement 674. 
Versetzung, dislocation 512. 
Verwindung, twist Per unit length 298, 318. 
Verzerrungsmaße, Äquivalenz, strain measures, equivalence 268-269. 
-, besondere, special 269, 271. 
-,logarithmische, logarithmic 269-270, 271. 
Verzerrungstensor, distortion tensor 3 SO. 
Viererimpuls, four-momentum 200, 202, 217. 
Viererkraft, four-force 7. 203. 
Viererpotential, four-potential 212. 
-, electromagnetic potential 668. 
Viererstromfeld, charge-current field 666 bis 
667. 
Viererstrompotential, charge-current potential 668. 
Virialsatz, virial theorem 573. 
virtuelle Arbeit, virtual work 595-600. 
virtuelle V errückung, virtual displacement 
596-597. 
viskoelastische Theorien, visco-elastic theories 
733-734, 740. 
Viskosität einer Flüssigkeit, lineare, linear 
viscosity of a fluid 715-716. 
- -, nichtlineare, non-linear 720--722. 
Viskositätskoeffizient, quadratischer, crossviscosity 721. 
Viskositätskoeffizienten einer Flüssigkeit, 
viscosities of a fluid 717. 
vollkommen elastischer Körper, perfectly 
elastic body 233. 
vollkommen plastischer Körper, perfectly 
plastic body 233, 722-723. 
vollkommen weicher Körper, perfectly soft 
body 723. 
vollkommene Flüssigkeit, perfect fluid 233, 
710-715. 
Valterrasehe elektromagnetische Materialgleichungen, Volterra' s electromagnetic 
constitutive equations 7 40. 
Volumänderung an einer Stoßfront, volume 
change at a shock 521 
Volumdilatation, volume strain 266. 
Volumelement, Deformation, volume element, 
deformation 247-249, 266. 
-, materielle Ableitung, material derivative 
341-342. 
Sachverzeichnis. 879 
Volumen, materielles, material volume 339. 
Volumintegrale, Kinematik, volume integrals, 
kinematics 347. 
Volumkraft, body force 536. 
Volumviskosität, bulk viscosity 718. 
von Misesscher Satz über zirkulationserhaltende Bewegung, von Mises' theorem an 
circulation preserving motion 430. 
Vorzugsrichtungen, preferred directions 309. 
Vorzugssystem, preferred frame 443. 
Wärme und Arbeit, gegenseitige Umwandelbarkeit, heat and work, interconvertibility 
608, 614. 
Wärmeleitfähigkeit, thermal conductivity 709. 
Wärmeleitung, heat conduction 233. 
-, Fouriersches Gesetz, Fourier's law 709 bis 
710, 719. 
Wärmeleitungsgleichung, equation of thermal 
conduction 710. 
wahre Ladung s. freie Ladung. 
Wahrscheinlichkeitsdichte, probability density 175. 
Webersehe Transformation, Weber's Iransformation 422-424. 
Wechselwirkung von Materie und elektromagnetischem Feld, interaction of matter 
and electromagnetic field 692-693. 
in Newtons Dynamik, in Newtonian dynarnies 9. 
in der relativistischen Dynamik, in relativistic dynamics 10. 
Wechselwirkungs-Hamilton-Funktion, interaction H amiltonian 196. 
Weingartenscher erster Satz über Unstetigkeiten, Weingarten's first theorem an 
discontinuities 494. 
Weingartenscher zweiter Satz über Unstetigkeiten, Weingarten' s second theorem an 
discontinuities 496. 
Welle, Definition, wave, definition 508. 
Wellen im elastischen Körper, waves in an 
elastic body 726-727. 
in einem kohärenten System, in a coherent system 134. 
konstanter Wirkung, of constant action 
123. 
-, verschiedene Definitionen, various definitions 529. 
- in einer viskosen Flüssigkeit, in a viscous 
fluid 719---720. 
Wellengeschwindigkeit, wave velocity 134, 
201, 215. 216. 
Weltbeschleunigungsvektor, world acceleration vector 461. 
Weitgeschwindigkeitsfeld, world velocity field 
4 56---4 57. 
Weltgeschwindigkeitsgradient, world velocity 
gradient 461. 
weltinvariante Kinematik, world invariant 
kinematics 4 52-463. 
Weitlinie, world line 6. 
Welttensor, world tensor 456. 
der Ä therrelationen, of the aether relations 
679---680. 
Welttensor der Streckung, world tensor of 
sireiehing 458. 463. 
\Velttensor-Darstellung von Polarisation und 
Magnetisierung, world-tensor representation of polarization and magnetization 686 
bis 689. 
Weitwirbeltensor, world vorticity tensor 461. 
Whiteheadsche Gravitationstheorie, Whitehead' s theory of gravitation 2. 
Wiederherstellungskoeffizient, restitution 
coetficient 94, 9 5. 
Wiederherstellungsperiode, period of restitution 95. 
Windung von Stromlinien, torsion of streamlinies 3 76. 
Winkel der Scherung, angle of shear 293. 
Winkelcharakteristiken, angle characteristics 
131. 
Winkeleikonal, angle-eikonal 131. 
Winkelgeschwindigkeit, angular velocity 350, 
355, 437. 
- eines starren Körpers, of a rigid body 27, 
28. 
Winkel variable, angle variables 17 5, 1 77. 
-, Periodizität, periodic property 177. 
Wirbel und Quellen als Bewegungselemente, 
vortices and sources as elements of motion 
364-365. 
Wirbeiblatt, vortex sheet 512, 514, 519---522. 
-,materielles, material 515-517. 
Wirbelformel von CAUCHY, vorticity formula 
of Cauchy 421. 
Wirbellinie, vortex line 386. 
Wirbelmaß, dynamisches, dynamical vorticity number 3 79. 
-, kinematisches, kinematical vorticity number 363-364, 382, 403-404. 
Wirbelmittelwerte, vorticity averages 396 bis 
402. 
Wirbelmomente, vorticity moments 400--401. 
415. 
Wirbelröhre, vortex tube 386. 
Wirbelsatz von d' ALEMBERT für ebene Bewegung, vorticity theorem of d'Alembert for 
plane motion 421. 
von Sv ANBERG für rotationssymmetrische Bewegung, of Svanberg for rotationally symmetric motion 421. 
Wirbelsätze von HELMHOLTZ, vorticity theorems of Helmholtz 386---387, 389. 
Wirbeltensor in vier Dimensionen, vorticity 
tensor in four dimensions 461. 
Wirbelvektor, vorticity vector 354, 385-386. 
Wirkung, action 698. 
Wirkungsfunktion, characteristic function 11 7, 
120, 121, 137. 209. 
-, vierdimensionale, one-event characteristic 
function 21 5. 
Wirkungsquerschnitt für Einfang, cross section for capture 7 5. -, differentieller, für Streuung, for scattering, 
differential 7 5, 77. 
-.gesamter, für Streuung, for scattering, 
total 76. 
Wirkungsvariable, action variables 1 7 5, 177. 
880 Sachverzeichnis. 
zähe Flüssigkeit, viscous fluid 233. 
Zähigkeit s. Viskosität. 
Zeichen, häufig benutzte, symbols frequently 
used 235-239. 
Zeit, Einführung in die Feldtheorie, time, introduction into field theory 325. 
Zeitableitungen skalarer Integrale über bewegte Gebiete, time derivatives of scalar 
integrals over moving regions 67 S. 
Zeitkonstante (Relaxationszeit) einer viskosen Flüssigkeit, natural time ( relaxation 
time) of a viscous fluid 721. 
Zentralkräfte, centrat forces so. 
Zentrifugalkräfte, centrifugal forces 4 S. 
Zentripetalbeschleunigung, centripetal acceleration 31, 438. 
Zerlegung einer Bewegung, decomposition of 
motion 362. 
Zirkulation, circulation 356---357. 361, 385 
bis 389. 
-, Änderungsgeschwindigkeit, rate of change 
410. 
-,scheinbare, bei Relativbewegung, apparent, in relative motion 442. 
- eines Tensorfeldes, of a tensor field 814. 
- der Wirkung, of action 156, 163, 169. 
Zirkulationsbewegung, Ertelscher Satz, circulating motion, Ertel's theorem 424. 
zirkulationserhaltende Bewegung, circulation 
preserving motion 388-389, 392-393, 
405, 408, 432, 476. 711. 
Zorawskischer Satz über die Relativbewegung, Zorawski's theorem an relative motion 440. 
Zorawskisches Kriterium für Erhaltung des 
Flusses, Zorawski's criterion of flux conservation 346. 
Zufluß, influx 468-469. 
Zufuhr äußerer nicht-mechanischer Energie, 
external non-mechanical energy supply 638. 
Zug, tension 537. 551, 566, 574. 
Zukunft, future 200. 
zusammenhängender geschlossener Weg, einfach und mehrfach, connected circuit, 
simple and multiply 103. 
Zusammensetzung von Deformationen, composition of strains 282-283. 
- von Scherungen, of shears 296. 
Zusammenstoß s. auch Stoß, encounter see 
also collision 71, 94, 132, 217. 
Zustandsgleichung für eine Mischung, equation of state for a mixture 634-636. 
Zustandsraum, space of states 100, 163. 
Zwangsbedingungen, constraints 183, 600 bis 
602, 605-606. 
Zwangskräfte ohne Arbeitsleistung, workless 
reaction of constraints 38, 43, 57. 
zweiachsiger Spannungszustand, bi-axial 
stress 551. 
zweidimensionale Bewegung, Strömungspotential, /wo-dimensional motion, stream 
function 477-479. 
Zweikörperproblem, two-body problern 69. 
zweite Fundamentalform der Flächentheorie, 
second fundamental form of surface theory 812. 
zweiter Hauptsatz der Thermodynamik, 
second law of thermodynamics 643-647. 
zyklische Koordinaten, ignorable Co-ordinates 
58. 61, 102, 176. 179. 191. 
Zykloidenpendel, cycloidal pendulum 47. 
Zylinder, rotierender, cylinder, rotation 5 SO. 
Zylinderkoordinaten, cylindrical coordinates 
27. 
Subject Index. 
{ English-German.) 
Where English and German spelling of a ward is identical the Germanversion is omitted. 
Abnormality of a field, Torsion der Vektorlinien 400, 819, 825, 826. 
Absolute dimensions, absolute Dimensionen 
799-801. 
Absolute position, absolute Lage 6. 
Absolute space, absoluter Raum 6, 43. 
Absolute temperature, absolute Temperatur 
652. 
Absolute tensor, Absoluttensor 661. 
Absolute time, absolute Zeit 6. 
Acceleration, Beschleunigung 26, 30, 201. 
-, d' Alembert-Euler condition, d' A lembertEulersche Bedingung 388. 
-, d' Alembert-Euler formula, Formel von 
d'Alembert und Euler 374. 
-, Hankel-Appell condition, Hankel-Appellsche Bedingung 388. 
-, intrinsic formulae, Formeln zwischen den 
Komponenten 375-376. 
-, LAGRANGE's formula, Lagrangesche Formel 377. 
-, physical component, physikalische Komponente 27. 
Aceeieration energy, Beschleunigungsenergie 
63. 
Aceeieration of higher order, Beschleunigung 
höherer Ordnung 383, 439-440. 
Aceeieration potential, Beschleunigungspotential 389. 
Aceeieration vector, Beschleunigungsvektor 
140, 201 f. 
- - in four dimensions, in vier Dimensionen 461. 
Aceeieration wave, Beschleunigungswelle 523 
to 524. 
Accelerationless homogeneaus motion, beschleunigungslose homogene Bewegung 434 
to 436. 
Accelerationless motion, beschleunigungslose 
Bewegung 432-433. 
Accumulative material, akkumulierendes Material 733-734, 740. 
Action, Wirkung 698. 
Action line element, Linienelement der Wirkung 139. 
Action and reaction, Aktion und Reaktion 37. 
Action variables, Wirkungsvariablen 17 5. 1 77. 
Adhering of material to a surface, Haften der 
Substanz an einer. Oberfläche 386, 394 to 
396. 401. 
Adiabatic see also isentropic, adiabatisch s. 
auch isentrop. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 111/1. 
Adiabatic process, adiabatischer Prozeß 644. 
Aeolotropy, Aolotropie 70ü-701. 
Aether relations of MAXWELL and LORENTZ, 
A therrelationen von Maxwell und Lorentz 
660, 677-683. 
Affinity, Affinität 643, 646. 
AIRY's stress function, Airysche Spannungsfunktion 583. 
Amount of shear, Betrag der Scherung 293. 
Ampere-Lorentz principle, Ampere-Lorentzsches Prinzip 683. 
Amperian equivalent current, Amperescher 
Aquivalentstrom 686. 
Angle characteristics, Winkelcharakteristiken 
131. 
Angle-eikonal, Winkeleikonal 131. 
Angle of shear, Winkel der Scherung 293. 
Angle variables, Winkelvariable 17 5. 177. 
- -, periodic property, Periodizität 1 7 7. 
Angular momentum, Drehimpuls 34. 44, 56, 
66, 213, 221, 482. 
Angular velocity, Winkelgeschwindigkeit 350, 
355. 437. - - of a rigid body, eines starren Körpers 
27, 28. 
Anholonomic components, anholomone Komponenten 311, 801. 
Anisotropie solids, anisotrope Festkörper 314 
to 315. 
Antisymmetrie tensor, antisymmetrischer Tensor 66o-662. 
Aphelion, Aphel 51. 
Apparent circulation in relative motion, 
scheinbare Zirkulation bei Relativbewegung 
442. 
Apparent force (or fictitious force), Scheinkraft 4, 45. 535. 
Apparent stress, Scheinspannungen 550. 
Apparent torque, scheinbares Drehmoment 
535. 
APPELL's equations of motion, A ppellscke 
Bewegungsgleichungen 63. 
APPELL's theorem on vortex line stretching, 
Appellscher Satz über W irbellinienstrekkung 429-430. 
Approximate theory, Näherungstheorie 231. 
Apsides of periodic orbits, Apsiden periodischer Bahnen 50, 51. 
Are, deformation of an element of, Bogenelement, Deformation 247-249. 
material derivative of an element of, 
materielle Ableitung 341-342. 
56 
882 Subject Index. 
Assigned couple, Kräftepaardichte 538, 546. 
Assigned force, Kraftdichte 537. 
Astatic Ioad, astatische Belastung 574. 
Atomic weight, Atomgewicht 473. 
Axes, moving, bewegte Achsen 29. 
Axial k-vector density, axiale k- Vektordichte 
661. 
Axial relative tensor, axialer Relativtensor 661. 
Axial tensor, axialer Tensor 795. 
Axially symmetric see rotationally symmetric, drehsymmetrisch s. rotationssymmetrisch. 
Axiom of continuity, Axiom der Kontinuität 
243. 325. 
Axioms and experiments, Axiome und Experimente 228-230. 
Axiomatics, Axiomatik 5. 
Axis of shear, Achse der Scherung 292. 
Balance between deformation and rotation, 
Bilanz zwischen Deformation und Rotation 
397-399-
Balance of energy, Energiebilanz 607-615, 
691-697-
Balance equations in integral form, Bilanzgleichungen in Integralform 594. 
Balance laws, Bilanzgesetze 232. 
Balance of moment of momentum, Drehimpulsbilanz 531-532, 546, 554, 692-693, 
697-
of momentum, Impulsbilanz 531, 545, 
554, 691-698. 
- in a mixture, in einer Mischung 567. 
Ballistics, exterior, äußere Ballistik 48. 
Barotropic flow, barotrope Strömung 388, 712. 
Barygyroscope, schwerer Kreisel 92. 
Bending, Biegung 30G-302. 
Bending couple, Biegemoment 566. 
Bernoullian theorems, Bernoullische Sätze 
402-409. 
BERNOULLI's theorem of classical hydrodynamics, Bernoullischer Satz der klassischen Hydrodynamik 402-403. 
BERTRAND's theorem, Bertrandscher Satz 97, 
344. 
Bi-axial stress, zweiachsiger Spannungszustand 551. 
Binding energy, Bindungsenergie 218. 
BJ0RGUM's vorticity average theorem, Bjergumscher Wirbelmittelwertssatz 400. 
Body, concept, Körper, Begriff 466. 
Body force, Votumkraft 536. 
Bound charge see polarization charge. 
Boundaries, Grenzflächen 51 o-512. 
Boundary conditions of electromagnetism in 
four dimensions, elektromagnetische Randbedingungen in vier Dimensionen 669. 
- - in three dimensions, in drei Dimensionen 676--677. 
- for stress, für den Spannungszustand 
543. 
Boundary of motion, Randfläche der Bewegung 329-330. 
Bannding surface, reaction, Oberfläche, Kraftwirkungen 539-542. 
BoussrNESQ's construction, Boussinesqsche 
Konstruktion 253. 
Brachistochrone 48. 
BRILLOUIN's principle, Brillouinsches Prinzip 
703-704. 
Bulk viscosity, Votumviskosität 718. 
Caloric equation of state, kalorische Zustandsgleichung 619-620, 634-635. 
Canonical equations, kanonische Gleichungen 
63, 110, 154, 158. 168, 205, 206, 212. 
Canonical tensor forms, kanonische Tensorformen 842-843. 
Canonical transformations, kanonische Transformationen 144, 154, 1 57, 166, 169, 1 70. 
Capture, Einfang 71, 72, 73. 
Capture cross section, Einfangquerschnitt 7 5. 
CARNOT's theorem, Carnotsches Theorem 96. 
Catastrophe, relativistic, relativistische Katastrophe 217. 
CAUCHY's deformation tensor, Cauchyscher 
Deformationstensor 257-274, 282, 370. 
CAUCHY's first law of motion, Cauchysche 
erste Bewegungsgleichung 545-546, 556. 
568, 652. 
CAUCHY's fundamental theorem on the stress 
tensor, Cauchyscher Fundamentalsatz über 
den Spannungstensor 543, 595. 
-- - on strain and rotation, der V erformung und Drehung 259-261, 274, 277 
to 280. 
CAUCHY's law of elasticity, Cauchysches 
Elastizitätsgesetz 724. 
CAUCHY's law of motion, applications, Cauchysche Bewegungsgleichungen, Anwendungen 
568-607. 
- - in space-time, im Raumzeitkontinuum 554. 
CAUCHY's Iemma on the stress vector, Cauchyscher Satz über den Spannungsvektor 543. 
CAUCHY's reciprocal theorem on stress, 
Cauchyscher Reziprozitätssatz der Spannungen 547. 
CAUCHY's second law of motion, Cauchysche 
zweite Bewegungsgleichung 546, 652. 
CAUCHY's stress ellipsoid, Cauchysches Spannungsellipsoid 5 52. 
CAUCHY's stress quadric, Cauchysche quadratische Form des Spannungstensors 552. 
CAUCHY's stress tensor, Cauchyscher Spannungstensor 543. 
CAUCHY's theorems on spin, Cauchysche Sätze 
über die Drehgeschwindigkeit 354-355. 
CAUCHY's vorticity formula, Cauchysche Wirbelformet 421. 
Cauchy-Stokes fundamental theorem on motion, Cauchy-Stokesscher Fundamentalsatz 
über Bewegungen 362. 
Cayley-Klein parameters, Cayley-Kleinsche 
Parameter 21, 22. 
Celestial mechanics, Himmelsmechanik 2. 
Center of mass (or of gravity), Schwerpunkt 
31, 221, 481, 532. 
-, fundamental theorem, Schwerpunkts 
satz 483. 
Subject Index. 883 
Center-of-mass frame, Schwerpunktssystem 
71. 218. 
Central forces, Zentralkräfte SO. 
Centrifugal forces, Zentrifugalkräfte 45. 
Centripetal acceleration, Zentripetalbeschleunigung 31. 438. 
Change of volume at a shock, Änderung des 
Volumens an einer Stoßfront 521. 
Characteristic curves, method, charakteristische Kurven, Methode 124, 529. 
Characteristic function, Wirkungsfunktion 
117, 120, 121, 137. 209. 
Charge conservation, Ladungserhaltung 660, 
667. 
Charge-current field, Viererstromfeld 666-667. 
Charge and current as fundamental entities, 
Ladung und Strom als Fundamentalgrößen 
683. 
Charge-current potential, Viererstrompotential 
668. 
Charge, definition, Ladung, Definition 666. 
Charge density, Ladungsdichte 672. 
Charge equation, Ladungsgleichung 674. 
Charge potential, Ladungspotential 674. 
CHASLES' theorem, Chaslesscher Satz 14. 
Chemical interpretation of mass balance in 
the heterogeneaus medium, chemische 
Deutung der Massenbilanz im heterogenen 
Medium 473--474. 
Chemical potential, chemisches Potential 621, 
636, 638. 648-649. 
Christofiel condition for shock waves, Christolfelsche Stoßwellenbedingung 711. 
Christofiel symbols, Christoftei-Symbole 26, 
109, 804. 
Circle diagram of MoHR for stress, Mohrscher 
Spannungskreis 552. 
- - - for a tensor, Mohrscher Kreis für 
einen Tensor 253-254. 
Circuit, geschlossener Weg 103, 104, 156, 814. 
-. irreducible, irreduzibler 103, 104, 122. 
Circular cylinder, typical deformations, Kreiszylinder, typische Deformationen 299 to 
300. 
Circular frequencies, Kreisfrequenzen 180, 
182. 
Circulating motion, ERTEL's theorem, Zirkulationsbewegung, Ertelscher Satz 424. 
Circulation,Zirkulation 356--357.361, 385 to 
389. 
- of action, der Wirkung 156, 163, Hi9. 
-. apparent, in relative motion, scheinbare, 
bei Relativbewegung 442. 
-, rate of change, Änderungsgeschwindigkeit 
410. 
of a tensor field, eines Tensorfeldes 814. 
Circulation preserving motion, zirkulationserhaltende Bewegung 388-389, 392-393. 
405. 408, 432. 476, 711. 
Classical physics, its definition, klassische 
Physik, ihre Definition 234. 
Classification of spaces, Klassifikation der 
Räume 100. 
CLEBSCH's transformation, Clebsch- Transformation 424-427. 
Closed systems of equations, abgeschlossene 
Gleichungssysteme 232. 
Coefficient of thermal expansion, thermischer 
Ausdehnungskoeffizient 623. 
Collision, Stoß 71, 94, 132, 21 7. 
-, elastic, elastischer 95. 219. 
-, inelastic, unelastischer 95. 219. 
Collision parameter, Stoßparameter 71. 
Common frame, Bezugssystem 241, 246--247, 
325. 
Compatibility conditions in curved spaces, 
Kompatibilitätsbedingungen in gekrümmten Räumen 351-352. 
-. geometrical iterated, geometrische iterierte 496--498. 
-. kinematical, for discontinuities, kinematische, für Unstetigkeilen 503-506, 515. 
- for a moving surface, für eine bewegte 
Fläche SOü-501. 
- - for singular surfaces, auf singulären 
Flächen 493-494. 
- - for strain, des Verzerrungszustandes 
271, 307. 
- - for stretching, für Streckung 351. 
Complex-lamellar field, komplex lamellares 
Feld 824-825. 
Complex-lamellar motion, komplex-lamellare 
Bewegung 390, 400, 417--420, 431. 
Complex-screw motion, komplex-schraubenartige Bewegung 417--418, 431. 
Composition of shears, Zusammensetzung von 
Scherungen 296. 
Composition of strains, Zusammensetzung von 
Deformationen 282-283. 
Compressibility, Kompressibilität 623. 
Compression period, Verdichtungsperiode 9 S. 
- speed, Verdichtungsgeschwindigkeit 95. 
Compressive wave, Kompressionswelle 525. 
Compton effect, Compton-Etfekt 220. 
Concentrated Ioad, Punktbelastung 538-539. 
Concentration, Konzentration 470. 
Concepts, Begritfe 3, 6, 98. 
Condensation at a shock, Stoßfront, Dichteerhöhung 522. 
Conditions of compatibility in curved spaces, 
Bedingungen der Kompatibilität in gekrümmten Räumen 351-352. 
·- - for strain, für die Deformationen 271, 
307. - - for stretching, für Streckung 3 51. 
Conduction current, Leitungsstrom 672. 
Cone of shearing stress, Schubspannungskegel 
552. 
Configuration space, Konfigurationsraum 2, 
13. 100, 134. 
Connected circuit, simple and multiply, 
zusammenhängender geschlossener Weg 
einfach und mehrfach 103. 
Conservation of angular momentum, Erhaltung des Drehimpulses 692-693, 697. 
- of charge, der Ladung 660, 667. 
of energy, including electromagnetic 
fields, der Energie unter Einschluß des 
elektromagnetischen Feldes 691-698. 
of flux, des Flusses 346-34 7. 
56* 
884 Subject Index. 
Conservation of magnetic flux, Erhaltung 
des magnetischen Flusses 660, 667. 
of mass, der Masse 464, 466~474. 
- in a heterogeneaus medium, in einem 
heterogenen Medium 472. 
of mechanical energy, der mechanischen 
Energie 572-573. 
Conservation laws, Erhaltungssätze 232. 
Conservative forces, konservative Kräfte 571. 
Conservative k-vector field, konservatives 
k- Vektorfeld 665-666. 
Constant invariant tensor, konstanter invarianter Tensor 662. 
Constitutive equations, Materialgleichungen 
232, 233. 
- for electromechanics, der Elektromechanik 742-744. 
- of electromagnetic materials, elektromagnetische 736-742 
-, general properties, allgemeine Eigenschaften 70ü-704. 
- of a rigid body, eines starren Körpers 
704-705. 
Constraints, Zwangsbedingungen 183, 600 to 
602, 605-606. 
Contact Ioads, Berührungsbelastungen 536. 
Contact transformation, Berührungstransformation 124, 144. 
Continuity axiom, Kontinuitätsaxiom 243, 
325. 
Continuity equation of mass, Kontinuitätsgleichung der Masse 467. 
- in space-time, im Raumzeitkontinuum 
480. 
-, its solution, ihre Lösung 474-481. 
-, spatial, räumliche 342, 467. 
Continuous motion, kontinuierliche Bewegung 
325. 
Continuum mechanics, fundamental laws, 
Kontinuumsmechanik, Grundgesetze 545 to 
547. 
Continuum theories, physical basis, Kontinuitätstheorien, ihre physikalische Grundlage 228. 
Contra! surface, Kontrollfläche 540. 
Convected co-ordinates, mitgeschleppte Koordinaten 457. 460. 
Convected time flux, mitgeschleppter Fluß 
448-452, 675. 
Convection of a quantity, Konvektion einer 
Größe 337. 
of stretching and spin, von Streckung und 
Drehgeschwindigkeit 380-381. 
of vorticity, der Wirbelstärke 409-430. 
Convention on concentrated Ioads, Konvention über Punktbelastungen 539. 
- regarding description of motion, hinsichtlich der Beschreibung einer Bewegung 338. 
Convection theorems for vorticity, Konvektionssätze für Wirbelbewegung 413-421. 
Converse of the principle of virtual work, 
Umkehrung des Prinzips der virtuellen 
Arbeit 602-603. 
Co-ordinates, convected, Koordinaten, mtigeschleppte 4 57, 460. 
Co-ordinates, curvilinear, Koordinaten, 
krummlinige 25, 26, 43. 
-, generalized, verallgemeinerte 38, 59. 
-, ignorable, zyklische 58, 61, 102, 176, 179. 
191. 
---, material, materiefeste 326. 
-, spatial, raumfeste 326. 
Co-ordinate schemes of motion, Koordinatenschemata für die Bewegung 327. 
Co-ordinate systems, overlapping, Koordinatensysteme, überlappende 103. 
Co-ordinate transformation, Koordinatentransformation 164. 
- Coriolis acceleration, Coriolis-Beschleunigung 
30, 438, 462. 
Coriolis force, Corioliskraft 45. 
Co-rotational frame, mitrotierendes Bezugssystem 444-446. 
Co-rotational time flux, mitrotierender Fluß 
445, 451-452. 
CouLOMB-HOPKINS' theorem on maximum 
shearing stress, Coulomb-H opkinsscher Satz 
über die maximale Schubspannung 5 51, 
845-846. ' 
Coulomb scattering, Coulomb-Streuung 77. 
Couple, Kräftepaar 531, 536. 
Couple stress, Spannungszustand durch Kräftepaare 538, 546, 547. 
Covariant derivative, partial, partielle kovariante Ableitung 794, 804. 
- -,total, totale 246-247, 81ü-813. 
Covariant differentiation, kovariante Differentiation 811, 813. 
- - of a double tensor field, eines Doppeltensorfeldes 809. 
Cross force, Querkraft 558. 
Cross product, direktes Produkt 662. 
Cross section for capture, Wirkungsquerschnitt 
für Einfang 75. 
- for scattering, differential, differentieller, für Streuung 7 5, 77. 
- for scattering, total, gesamter, bei 
Streuung 76. 
Cross-viscosity, quadratischer Viskositätskoeffizient 721. 
Current and charge as fundamental entities, 
Strom und Ladung als Fundamentalgrößen 
683. 
Current density, Stromdichte 672. 
Current of dielectric convection, dielektrischer 
Verschiebungsstrom 686. 
Current equation, Stromgleichung 674. 
Current of polarization, Polarisationsstrom 
685, 686. 
Current potential, Strompotential 674. 
Curvature, least, geringste Krümmung 141 to 
143. 
Curvature of streamlines, Krümmung von 
Stromlinien 3 76. 
Curvilinear Bernoulli theorem, Bernoullischer 
Satz für eine gekrümmte Linie 406--407. 
Cyclic coordinates see coordinates, ignorable. 
Cylinder, rotation, rotierender Zylinder 5 SO. 
Cylindrical coordinates, Zylinderkoordinaten 
27. 
Subject Index. 885 
D' Alembert-Euler condition for the acceleration, d'Alembert-Eulersche Bedingung 
für die Beschleunigung 388. 
D' Alembert-Euler spatial continuity equation, d'Alembert-Eulersche räumliche Kontinuitätsgleichung 467. 
D' Alembert-Euler vorticity equation, d' A lembert-Eulersche Wirbelgleichung 413. 
D'Alembert motions, d'Alembertsche Bewegungen 432. 
D' ALEMBERT's principle, d' Alembertsches 
Prinzip 57. 59. 96, 532. 
D' ALEMBERT's stream function, d' A lembertsches Strömungspotential 474. 
D' ALEMBERT's vorticity theorem for plane 
motion, d' A lembertscher Wirbelsatz für 
ebene Bewegung 421. 
De Broglie waves, de Broglie-Wellen 215. 216. 
Decomposition of motion, Zerlegung einer 
Bewegung 362. 
Deformation 243-325. 
of areas, Flächendilatation 263. 
- of an oriented body, Deformation eines 
orientierten Körpers 311. 
Deformation gradients, Deformationsgradienten 245-249. 
Deformationtensor of CAUCHY, Deformationstensor von Cauchy 257-274, 282, 370. 
- - of GREEN, von Green 257-274, 370. 
Deformed material, deformiertes Material244. 
Degeneracy in mechanics, Entartung in der 
Mechanik 180, 183, 191. 
- in thermodynamics, in der Thermodynamik 633-634. 
Degrees of freedom, Freiheitsgrade 38. 
Density, Dichte 342. 
of magnetic flux, des magnetischen Flusses 
6]2. 
of mass, der Masse 465. 
of polarization, der Polarisation 68 5. 
Deviation equation, Deviationsgleichung 141. 
Deviator 834. 
Deviator of Stretching, Deviator der Streckung 
349. 
Dielectric, constitutive equations, Dielektrikum, Materialgleichungen 736---740. 
- with elastic properties, mit elastischen 
Eigenschaften 742-744. 
Differential form of general balance, differentielle Form der Generalbilanz 468. 
Differentiation, exterior, äußere Differentiation 165. 
Diffusion of circulation, Diffusion der Zirkulation 441. 
Diffusion equation, Diffusionsgleichung 706. 
Diffusion kinematics, Diffusion, Kinematik 
469. 
Diffusion velocity, Diffusionsgeschwindigkeit 
470. 
in a mixture, Diffusion in einem Gemenge 
705-708. 
of stretching and spin, von Streck- und 
Drehgeschwindigkeit 380-381. 
of vorticity, der Wirbelstärke 409-430, 
441. 
Dilatation 3 50, 4 31. 
Dimension of action, Dimension der Wirkung 
698. 
Dimensions of electromagnetic quantities, 
Dimensionen elektromagnetischer Größen 
671, 672, 680-681, 698-699-
of energy quantities, von Energiegrößen 
615. 
of entropy, der Entropie 620. 
of temperature, der Temperatur 619. 
Dimensional invariance, dimensioneile Invarianz 701-702. 
Dimensional transformation, dimensioneile 
Transformation 798. 
Director gradient, Direktorgradient 312. 
Director quadric of a tensor, reziproke quadratische Form eines Tensors 251. 
Directors of an oriented body, Direktoren 
eines orientierten Körpers 311. 
Discontinuities, various definitions, Unstetigkeiten, verschiedene Definitionen 529. 
Discontinuity surface see singular surface, 
Unstetigkeitsfläche s. singuläre Fläche. 
Discontinuity types, Unstetigkeitstypen 492. 
Dislocation, Versetzung 512. 
Displacement derivative, Verrückungsableitung 501-503. 
Displacement, electric, dielektrische Verschiebung 674. 
Displacement gradients, small, kleine V errückungsgradienten 306. 
Displacement, infinitesimal, infinitesimale 
Verrückung 25. 29. 
Displacement parallel to a plane, Verrückung 
parallel zu einer Ebene 12, 199. 
Displacement potential, Verrückungspotential 
2]7. 
Displacementspeed of a surface, V errückungsgeschwindigkeit einer Fläche 498-499. 506. 
Displacement vector, V errückungsvektor 24 7. 
Dissipative stress, dissipativer Spannungsanteil 5 71, 640. 
Dissipative systems, dissipative Systeme 185. 
Distorbon tensor, Verzerrungstensor 3 SO. 
Double tensor, Doppeltensor 242, 80S. 
Double tensor equations, Doppeltensorgleichungen 246. 
Doublet, Doppelquelle 334. 
Dual of a tensor, dualer Tensor 661. 
Duality principle, Dualitätsprinzip 513. 
- -, first, erstes 242, 246. 
- -, second, zweites 263. 
DuHEM's acceleration formula, Duhemsche 
Beschleunigungsformel 378, 425. 
Dynamical conditions at a singular surface, 
dynamische Bedingungen an einer singulären Fläche 545-547. 
Dynamical theory, general, allgemeine dynamische Theorie 98. 
Dynamical vorticity number, dynamisches 
Wirbelmaß 379. 
Dynamics, Dynamik 1, 2, 3, 8, 108, 198, 204. 
-, geometrical representations, geometrische 
Darstellungen 98. 
-, isoenergetic, bei konstanter Energie 100, 136. 
886 Subject Index. 
Dynamics of a particle, Dynamik eines Teilchens 43. 
of particle systems, von Teilchensystemen 
56seq. 
of rigid bodies, der starren Körper 56seq., 
65. 
Efflux of energy, Energieabfluß 609. 
Eigenfrequencies, Eigenfrequenzen 2, 81. 
Eikonal 11 7, 131. 
EINSTEIN's general theory of relativity, 
Einsteins allgemeine Relativitätstheorie 2. 
Elastic aether model, elastisches Äthermodell 
727-730. 
Elastic collision, elastischer Stoß 95. 219. 
Elastic dielectric, elastisches Dielektrikum 
742-744. 
Elastic stress, elastischer Spannungszustand 
571. 
Elasticity, linear, lineare Elastizität 723-727. 
Electric displacement, dielektrische Verschiebung 674. 
Electric field (strength), elektrische Feldstärke 
672. 
Electric potential, elektrisches Potential 674. 
Electromagnetic conservation laws, elektromagnetische Erhaltungssätze 689---700. 
Electromagnetic constitutive equations, elektromagnetische Materialgleichungen 736 to 
742. 
Electromagnetic energy, elektromagnetische 
Energie 689. 
Electromagnetic field, elektromagnetisches 
Feld 667. 
- -, analogy with quasi-elastic aether, 
Analogie zum quasielastischen Äther 729. 
-, axially symmetric, axsialsymmetrisches 54. -, interaction with matter, W echselwirkung mit Materie 692-693. 
Electromagnetic field equations, four-dimensional form, elektromagnetische Feldgleichungen, vierdimensionale Form 669. 
- -, three-dimensional form, dreidimensionale Form 676-677. 
Electromagnetic integral laws, four-dimensional form, elektromagnetische Integralgesetze, vierdimensionale Form 667. 
- -, three-dimensional form, dreidimensionale Form 673-674. 
Electromagnetic momentum, elektromagnetischer Impuls 689. 
Electromagnetic potential, Viererpotential 
212, 668. 
Electromagnetic stress tensor, elektromagnetischer Spannungstensor 689. 
Electromagnetism, linear, linearer Elektromagnetismus 233. 
Electromechanics, constitutive equations, 
Elektromechanik, Materialgleichungen 742 
to 744. 
Electromotive intensity, elektromotorische Intensität 672. 
Electron microscope, Elektronenmikroskop 54. 
Electrostatic field, elektrostatisches Feld 213. 
Ellipsoid of inertia, Trägheitsellipsoid 33, 486. 
Elongation 256-268. 
-, principal axes, Hauptachsen 281. 
Elongation quadric, quadratische Form des 
Elongationstensors 268. 
Elongation tensor, Elongationstensor267-268. 
Encounter seealso collision, Zusammenstoß s. 
auch Stoß 132, 217. 
Energy of the electromagnetic field, Energie 
des elektromagnetischen Feldes 689. 
Energy, general theory, Energie, allgemeine 
Theorie 607-615. 
-, kinetic, kinetische 35,. 36. 39, 44, 365 to 
369. 377. 402, 482--491. 
-,potential, potentielle 42, 210, 212, 571. 
-, reduction to normal, Reduktion auf Normalform 180. 
-,total, gesamte 44, 49. 57. 58, 63, 136. 
Energy balance, Energiebilanz 607-615, 
691-697. 
- - in a heterogeneaus medium, in heterogenem Medium 612-614. 
Energy conservation, including electromagnetic fields, Energieerhaltung unter Einschluß 
des elektromagnetischen Feldes 691-698. 
Energy equation, Energiegleichung 58. 60, 
109. 207, 212, 215. 
Energy function, Energiefunktion 143. 
Energy impulse, Energiestoß 612. 
Energy integral, Energieintegral 58, 60, 63. 
161, 213. 
Energy minimum, KELVIN's theorem, Energieminimum, Kelvinscher Satz 368. 
Energy-momentum space, Energie-ImpulsRaum 130. 
Energy-momentum vector, Energie-ImpulsVektor 110, 114, 202, 696. 
Energy surface, Energiefläche 143, 620. 
Enthalpy, Enthalpie 627. 
Entropy, general theory, Entropie, allgemeine 
Theorie 61 5-64 7. 
Entropy concept, Entropiebegriff 616. 
Entropy inequality, Entropieungleichung 
643-647. 
Entropy production, Entropieerzeugung 638 
to 647. 
Equation of continuity see continuity equation. 
- of state for a mixture, Zustandsgleichung 
für eine Mischung 634-636. 
- of thermal conduction, W ärmeleitungsgleichung 71 0. 
Equations of motion (see also under CAUCHY 
and EuLER), Bewegungsgleichungen (s. 
auch unter Cauchy und Euter) 6, 7, 43, 
65, 203. 
Equilibrium of rods, Gleichgewicht von Stäben 
564-567. 
- of shells, von Schalen 556-564. 
-, thermodynamic, thermodynamisches 647 
to 660. 
Equilibrium configurations, Gleichgewichtskonfigurationen 180, 182. 
Equimomental mass distributions, Massenverteilungen gleicher Trägheitsmomente 33. 
Subject Index. 887 
Equipresence principle, Aquipräsenzprinzip 
703-704. 
Equivalence of strain measures, A"quivalenz 
der Verzerrungsmaße 268-269. 
- of surface and volume sources, von Oberflächen- und Raumquellen 469. 
Ertel commutation formula, Erleische Vertauschungsformet 413. 
Ertel-Rossby convection theorem, ErtelRossbyscher Konvektionssatz 414. 
ERTEL's potential theorem, Ertelscher Potentialsatz 423. 
ERTEL's theorem on circulating motions, Ertelscher Zirkulationssatz 424. 
Euclidean frame, euklidisches Bezugssystem 
455. 670. 
Euclidian space, euklidischer Raum 241. 
Euclidean space-time and kinematics, euklidisches Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum und Kinematik 453. 454-455-
Euler acceleration, Eutersehe Beschleunigung 
438. 
Euler-d' Alembert paradox, Euler-d' A lembertsches Paradoxon 541-542. 
Euler-d' Alembert principle, Euler-d' A lembertsches Prinzip 5 32. 
Euler-Ertel vorticity theorems, Euler-Ertelsche Wirbelsätze 413-414. 
Euler-Lagrange equation, Euter-LagrangeGleichungen 107, 204, 206. 
EuLER's criterion for isochoric motion, Eulersches Kriterium für isochore Bewegung 34 3. 
-- - for rigid motion, für starre Bewegung 
350. 
EuLER's diagram in thermodynamics, Eulersches Diagramm für die Thermodynamik 
623. 
EuLER's dynamical equation for fluids, Eutersehe Bewegungsgleichung für Flüssigkeiten 
710. 
EuLER's equations forarigid body, Eutersehe 
Gleichungen des starren Körpers 67, 705. 
EuLER's expansion formula, Eutersehe Divergenzformel 342, 347, 373-
EuLER's laws of classical mechanics, Eutersehe Grundgleichungen 530, 531. 
EuLER's material and spatial continuity equations, Eu/ersehe materielle und räumliche 
Kontinuitätsgleichungen 467. 
EuLER's tensor of inertia, Euterscher Trägheitstensor 485, 490, 573-
EULER's theorem on irrotational motion, 
Euterscher Satzüber Potentialströmung 359-
- on spherical surface displacements, 
Eulersches Theorem über die Verschiebung 
auf Kugelflächen 13. 
Eulerian angle, Eutersehe Winkel18, 22, 24, 65. 
Eulerian parameters, Eutersehe Parameter 17, 
20, 21, 22, 24, 28. 
Event, Raum-Zeit-Punkt 5. 453. 
Exactness of theory, Exaktheit einer Theorie 
231-232. 
Expansion coefficient, thermal, thermischer 
A usdehnungskoeflizient 623. 
Expansive wave, Expansionswelle 524, 525. 
Experiments and axioms, Experimente und 
Axiome 228-230. 
Explosion of a particle, Explosion eines Teilchens 217seq. 
Extension, Dehnung 255-256, 257. 260 to 
262, 266---267, 274. 
Extensive variable, extensive Variable 64 7. 
External non-mechanical energy supply, 
Zufuhr äußerer nicht-mechanischer Energie 
638. 
External power, Leistung äußerer Arbeit 638. 
Extremal, Extremale 123. 
Extremal properties of tensors, Extremaleigenschaften von Tensoren 845. 
Extrinsic Ioads, äußere Belastung 536. 
FARADAY's law of induction, Faradaysches 
Induktionsgesetz 674. 
FEREL's law, Ferelsches Gesetz 55. 
FicK's law of diffusion, Ficksches Gesetz der 
Diffusion 706. 
Fictitious forces (or apparent forces), Scheinkräfte 4, 45, 535-
Field, continuous, kontinuierliches Feld 227. 
Field equations, Feldgleichungen 232, 233. 
- of electromagnetism in four dimensions, elektromagnetische, in vier Dimensionen 669. 
- - in three dimensions, in drei Dimensionen 676-677. 
Figuratrix 116. 
FINGER's theorem on strain and rotation, 
Fingerscher Satz über Deformation und 
Drehung 278. 
Finite rotation, endliche Drehung 274-283. 
Finitely elastic body, nichtlinearer elastischer 
Körper 730. 
Finsler space, Finsterscher Raum 106. 
Flexibility, perfect, vollkommene Biegsamkeit 
565. 
Flow along a curve, Linienintegral der Geschwindigkeit 3 57. 
Flow of a tensor field, Linienintegral eines 
Tensorfeldes 814. 
Flux of a tensor field, Fluß eines Tensorfeldes 
815. 
Force, Kraft 1, 6, 531. 
Force exerted by arigid obstacle, Kraft, dievon 
einem festen Hindernis ausgeübt wird 540. 
Forces, effective, effektive Kräfte 57-
--, external, äußere Kräfte 37-
--, fictitious (or apparent), Scheinkräfte 4, 45, 
535- -, generalized, verallgemeinerte Kräfte 42. 
- of inertia, Trägheitskräfte 57. 
-, internal, innere Kräfte 37-
-, reversed effective, Trägheitskräfte 57. 
Force function see potential function. 
Force systems, Kraftsysteme 37-
FoucAULT's pendulum, Foucaultsches Pendel 
ss. 
Foucault rotation, Foucaultsche Pendeldrehung 53. 56. 
Four-force, Viererkraft 7, 203. 
Four-momentnm, Viererimpuls 200, 202, 217. 
888 Subject Index. 
Four-potential, Viererpotential 212, 668. 
FouRIER's law of heat conduction, Fouriersches Gesetz der Wärmeleitung 709--71 0, 
719. 
Fracture, Bruch 510. 
Frame, co-rotational, mitrotierendes Bezugssystem 444-446. 
-, irrotational, rotationsfreies 446--44 7. 
-, preferred, bevorzugtes 443. 
- of reference, moving, bewegtes 30, 45. 68, 
200. 
Frames of re{erence, Bezugssysteme 25, 71, 
78. 200, 218, 241, 246--247. 325. 
Free charge, freie Ladung 684. 
Free energy, freie Energie 627. 
Free enthalpy, freie Enthalpie 627. 
Frequency, Frequenz 179, 180, 182. 
FRESNEL's dragging coefficient, Fresnelscher 
Mitführungskoeffizient 739. 
Friction, Reibung 85. 
Functions of matrices, Funktionen von Matrizen 838-840. 
Fundamental equations of thermodynamics, 
Grundgleichunge.n der Thermodynamik 628. 
Fundamental identities for strain invariants, 
fundamenta_le I dentitäten zwischen V erformungsinvarianten 265. 
Fundamental identity for heterogeneaus media, Fundamentalidentität für heterogene 
Medien 471. 
Fundamental strain theorems of CAUCHY, 
Fundamentalsätze der Verformung von 
Cauchy 259--261, 274, 277-280. 
Fundamental theorem on the center of mass, 
Schwerpunktssatz 483. 
- of motion decomposition, Fundamentalsatz der Zerlegung einer Bewegung 362. 
- on strain of shells, Fundamentalsatz 
der Verformung von Schalen 322-323. 
Future, Zukunft 200. 
Galilean frame of reference, Galileisches Bezugssystem 200, 456. 
Galilean invariance, Galilei-Invarianz 491. 
Galilean principle of relativity, Galileisches 
Relativitätsprinzip 491, 535. 
Galilean observer, Galileischer Beobachter 200. 
Galilean space-time and kinematics, Galileisches Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum und Kinematik 453. 455-456. 461. 
Galilean transformation, generalization, Ga/ilei-Transformation, Verallgemeinerung 681. 
Gas mixtures, kinetic theory, Gasmischungen, 
kinetische Theorie 567-568, 612-614. 
Gauge transformation, Eichtransformation 
669, 675. 
GAuss' theorem see GREEN's transformation. 
Gauss-Weingarten equations, Gauß-Weingartensche Gleichungen 812. 
General balance, Generalbilanz 468. 
-- -- at a discontinuity surface, an einer 
Unstetigkeitsfläche 526-527. 
General conservation law, allgemeiner Erhaltungssatz 468. 
General co-ordinates in space-time, generalisierte Koordinaten im Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum 453. 
Generalized convection vector, generalisierter Konvektionsvektor 416--417. 
Generalized Galilean transformation, verallgemeinerte Galilei- Transformation 681. 
Generalized shear, generalisierte Scherung 297. 
Generating functions, erzeugende Funktionen 
146, 169. 
Geometrical mechanics, geometrische Mechanik 98, 215. 
Geometrical motion classes, geometrische 
Bewegungsklassen 328-329, 430-431. 
GeOmetrical representation of stress, geometrische Darstellung des Spannungszustandes 552. 
- of tensors, von Tensoren 250-255. 
GIBBS' diagram, Gibbssches Diagramm 620. 
Gibbs-Duhem equation, Gibbs-Duhemsche 
Gleichung 648. 
Gibbs equation of thermodynamics, Gibbssche 
Gleichung der Thermodynamik 621, 635 to 
638. 
Gibbs function, Gibbssches Potential 628. 
GREEN's deformation tensor, Greenscher Deformationstensor 257-274. 370. 
GREEN's transformation, Gaußscher Satz 815 
to 816. 
GREENHILL's acceleration formula, Greenhillsche Beschleunigungsformel 378. 
GRIOLI's theorem for homogeneaus strain, 
Griolischer Satz für homogenen V erformungszustand 290. 
Gromeka-Beltrami theorems on screw motion, Gromeka-Beltramische Sätze über 
Schraubenbewegungen 392-393. 418. 
Gwyther-Finzi stress functions, GwytherFinzische Spannungsfunktionen 585-587. 
Gyrocompass, Kreiselkompaß 90, 91. 
Gyroscopic couple, einen Kreisel aufrichtendes Drehmoment 91. 
Gyroscopic stability, Kreiselstabilität 185. 
Gyroscopic stiffness, Kreise/bewegung, Steifheit 90. 
HADAMARD's Iemma on singular surfaces, 
Hadamardscher Satz über singuläre Flächen 492-493. 
HAMILTON's canonical equations, Hamiltonsche kanonische Gleichungen 62, 63, 110, 
207. 
HAMILTON's characteristic function see characteristic function. 
HAMILTON's method in optics, Hamittonsehe 
Methode in der Optik 107, 110, 117, 131. 
HAMILTON's partial differential equations, 
H amiltonsche partielle Differentialgleichungen 119. 
HAMILTON's principle, Hamiltonsches Prinzip 
107, 110, 204, 205, 604-605. 
HAMILTON's two-point characteristic or principal function, Hamilton's Zweipunktcharakteristik oder Hauptfunktion 117, 
120, 137. 209. 
Subject Index. 889 
Hamilton-Jacobi equation, Hamilton-]acobischeGleichung 117-120,122,125,130. 
138. 157. 170, 175. 209, 213, 215. 
Hamiltonian action, Hamittonsehe Wirkung 
110, 204, 205. 
Hamiltonian dynamics, Hamittonsehe Dynamik 112, 113, 204. 
Hamiltonian function, H amilton-Funktion 
62,109.110,206,213.214. 
Hamiltonian four-vector (of momentum), 
H amiltonscher Vierer- Vektor (des I mpulses) 205, 215. 
Hamiltonian method, H amiltonsche Methode 
2, 3. 
Hamiltonian relativistic dynamics, Hamiltonsche relativistische Dynamik 204-206. 
Hamiltonian surface, H amiltonsche Fläche 116. 
Hamiltonian three-momentum, Hamittonseher Dreier-Impuls 213. 
Hankel-Appell condition for the acceleration, 
Hankel-A ppellsche Bedingung für die 
Beschleunigung 388. 
Harmonie oscillation, harmonische Schwingung 529. 
Harmonie oscillator, harmonischer Oszillator 
46, 210. 
Heat conduction, Wärmeleitung 233. 
- -, FouRIER's law, Fouriersches Gesetz 
709-710, 719. 
Heat and work, interconvertibility, Wärme 
und Arbeit, gegenseitige U mwandelbarkeit 
608, 614. 
Helmholtz-Föppl formula, Helmholtz-Föpplsche Formel 366. 
Helmholtz-Zorawski criterion, Helmholtz-Zorawskisches Kriterium 341. 
HELMHOLTz's first vorticity theorem, Helmholtzscher erster Wirbelsatz 386--387. 
HELMHOLTz's second vorticity theorem, 
Helmholtzscher zweiter Wirbelsatz 389, 409. 
HELMHOLTz's third vorticity theorem, Helmholtzscher dritter Wirbelsatz 389, 410. 
Hereditary materials, Nachwirkung als M aterialeigenschaft 733-734, 740. 
Herpolhode, Herpolkadie 83, 85. 
Heterogeneaus media, heterogene Medien 469 
to 474, 567-568, 612-614, 634-638, 
645-650. 
-, conservation of mass, Erhaltung der 
Masse 472. 
-, fundamental identy, Fundamentalidentität 4 71. 
History of dynamics, Geschichte der Dynamik 
1. 
of field description of motion, der Feldbeschreibung der Bewegung 327. 
of stretching and shearing theory, der 
Theorie der Deformationsgeschwindigkeit 
349. 
of the theory of spin, der Theorie der Drehgeschwindigkeit 356. 
Hodograph 26. 
HÖLDER's principle, Höldersches Prinzip 139. 
Holonomic constraints, holonome Zwangsbedingungen 600--602. 
Holonomic system (see also non- and semiholonomic), holonomes System 38, 60. 
Homogeneity and isotropy of space and 
space-time, axiom, Axiome der Homogenität und Isotropie des Raums und RaurnZeitkontinuums 9. 10. 
Homogeneaus motion, homogene Bewegung 
434-436. 
Homogeneaus state in thermodynamics, 
homogener Zustand in der Thermodynamik 
647-650. 
Homogeneaus strain, homogener Verformungszustand 285-298. 
HooKE's law, Hookesches Gesetz 724. 
Hugoniot-Duhem theorem on the speed of 
displacement, Hugoniot-Duhemscher Satz 
über die V errückungsgeschwindigkeit 506. 
HUGONIOT's theorem on sound waves, Hugoniotscher Satz über Schallwellen 712. 
HuYGENs' construction, Huygenssche Konstruktion 123. 
Hydrostatic pressure, hydrostatischer Druck 
549. 574. 
Hydrostatic stress, hydrostatischer Spannungszustand 544. 
Hyperbolic motion in space-time, hyperbolische Bewegung im Raumzeitkontinuum 210. 
Hyperelastic body, hyperelatischer Körper 
725. 730. 
Hypo-elasticity, Hypoelastizität 731-733. 
Ideal gas, ideales Gas 633. 
Ideal material, idealisierte Substanz 700. 
Ignorably co-ordinates, zyklische Koordinaten 58, 61, 102, 176, 179. 191. 
Imbedding theory of strain, Einbettungstheorie der Verformung 314. 
Impact parameter, Stoßparameter 71. 
Impenetrability of matter, Undurchdringlichkeil der Materie 244, 325. 
Impulse, Stoß 536. 
Impulsive balance at a singular surface, Stoßbilanz an einer singulären Fläche 527-528. 
Impulsive force, Stoßkraft 92. 
Impulsive moment, Stoßmoment 92. 
Impulsive motion, Stoßbewegung 92. 
Impulsive work, Stoßarbeit 92. 
Incompatibility of reference configurations, 
Inkompatibilität der Bezugskonfigurationen 273. 
Independent circuits, unabhängige geschlossene Wege 103. 
Index of refraction, Brechungsindex 740. 
lndicatrix 116. 
Individualmotion of constituents, individuelle 
Bewegung der Phasen 469. 
Induction law of FARADAY, Induktionsgesetz 
von Faraday 674. 
Induction lines, Induktionslinien 674. 
Inelastic collision, Unelasfischer Stoß 95. 219. 
Inequalities between tensor invariants, Ungleichungen zwischen Tensorinvarianten 
835-836. 
Inequalities, thermodynamic, thermodynamische Ungleichungen 652-659. 
890 Subject Index. 
Inert mixture, träge Mischung 472. 
Inertia, ellipsoid of, Trägheitsellipsoid 33. 486. 
---, moments of, Trägheitsmomente 32, 33, 
485-486. 
-, principal axes, Hauptträgheitsachsen 32, 
33. 36. 485-486. 
-, principal moments of, Hauptträgheitsmomente 32, 33, 485. 
-, products of, Deviationsmomente 31, 486. 
-, tensor of, Trägheitstensor 485-486, 490. 
lnertial frame, Inertialsystem 531, 533, 535, 
555. 
Infinitesimal oscillation, infinitesimale 
Schwingung 529. 
Infinitesimal strain, historical remarks, infinitesimale Verformungen, historische Bemerkungen 270. 
Inflation of a circular cylinder, homogene Dilatation eines Kreiszylinders 299---300. 
- of a sphere, einer Kugel 302. 
Influx, Zufluß 468-469. 
Instantaneous space, momentaner Raum 457. 
Integral, first, of motion, erstes Integral der 
Bewegung 158, 1 70. 
Integral form, tour-dimensional, of electromagnetic laws, vierdimensionale Integralform der elektromagnetischen Gesetze 66 7. 
-, three-dimensional, of electromagnetic 
laws, dreidimensionale, der elektromagnetischen Gesetze 673-674. 
Integral invariant in phase space, relative 
and absolute, relative und absolute Integralinvariante im Phasenraum, 157, 172. 
Integral of a tensor field, Integral eines Tensorfeldes 808, 813-817. 
Intensity balance between deformation and 
rotation, Intensitätsbilanz zwischen Deformation und Rotation 396---397. 
Intensity of a tensor, Intensität eines Tensors 
834. 
Intensive variable, intensive Variable 647. 
Interaction of matter and electromagnetic 
field, Wechselwirkung von Materie und 
elektromagnetischem Feld 692-693. 
in Newtonian dynamics, in Newtons Dynamik 9. 
in relativistic dynamics, in der relativistischen Dynamik 10. 
Interaction Hamiltonian, WechselwirkungsR amiltonfunktion 196. 
Interior part of stress, innerer Spannungsanteil 568. 
Interna! energy, innere Energie 609, 619 to 
620, 627. 
- - and strain energy, und Deformationsenergie 611-612. 
Intrinsic theory of strain, Eigentheorie der 
Verformung 314. 
Invariance of constitutive equations, Invarianz von Materialgleichungen 701-703. 
Invariance of GALILEO, Galileische Invarianz 
491. 
Invariance with respect to moving observers, 
Invarianz bezüglich bewegter Beobachter 
443. 
Invariance in space-time, Invarianz im RaumZeit-Kontinuum 452. 
of stretching and spin in relative motion, 
von Streckung und Drehgeschwindigkeit bei 
Relativbewegung 440--441. 
Invariant, bilinear, bilineare Invariante 144. 
Invariant decomposition, invariante Zerlegung 840--842. 
Invariant directions in adeformation, invariante Richtungen einer Deformation 280-282. 
- - in motion, einer Bewegung 344--345. 
Invariant integral and differential equations, 
invariante Integral- und Differentialgleichungen 662-666. 
Invariants of strain, Invarianten der V erformung 264-266. 
of stress, des Spannungstensors 5 51. 
of stretching, der Streckung 349. 
of a tensor, eines Tensors 832-836. 
of vector lines, der Vektorlinien 818-819. 
Irreconcilable circuits, nicht ineinander überführbare geschlossene Wege 103. 
Irreducihle circuit, irreduzibler geschlossener 
Weg 103, 104, 122. 
Irreversibility, Irreversibilität 644. 
Irreversible thermodynamics, irreversible 
Thermodynamik 233, 616, 706---707, 734 
to 735-
Irrotational see lamellar field. 
Irrotational frame, rotationsfreies Bezugssystem 446---44 7. 
Irrotational motion, Potentialströmung 3 57 
to 360, 391, 404, 408, 431. 
-, theorem of KELVIN and HELMHOLTZ, 
Kelvin-Helmholtzscher Satz 393. 
-, theorem of KIRCHHOFF, Kirchhoftscher 
Satz 394. -, theorem of maximum speed, Satz vom 
maximalen Geschwindigkeitsbetrag 404. 
-, theorems of SuPINO, Supinasehe Sätze 
395-
Irrotational vortex, Potentialwirbel 362, 4 32. 
Isentropic change, isentrope Veränderung 622. 
Isentropic path, isentroper Weg 624. 
Isotropicelasticity, isotrope Elastizität 724,730. 
Isobaric compressibility, isobare Kompressibilität 623. 
Isochoric deformation, isochore Deformation 
283. 
Isochoric motion, isochore Bewegung 343 to 
344, 431, 525. 
Isostatic co-ordinates, isostatische K oordinaten 848. 
Isostatic surfaces, isostatische Flächen 847 to 
850. 
Isothermal compressibility, isotherme Kompressibilität 623. 
Isothermal path, isothermer Weg 624. 
Isotropie functions of strain, isotrope Verformungs/unktionen 265, 283. 
Isotropy, Isotropie 700. 
of fluids, der Flüssigkeiten 715-716. 
and homogeneity of space and spacetime; axiom, und Homogenität des Raumes 
und Raum-Zeitkontinuums, Axiom 9. 10. 
Subject Index. 891 
Isotropy, thermal, thermische Isotropie 709. 
Isotropy group, Isotropiegruppe 701. 
Iterated geometrical conditions of compatibility, iterierte geometrische Kompatibilitätsbedingungen 496--498. 
Iterated kinematical compatibility conditions 
for discontinuities, iterierte kinematische 
Kompatibilitätsbedingungen für Unstetigkeilen 505-506. 
}ACOBI's complete integral of the HamiltonJ acobi equation, 1 acobis vollständiges Integral der Hamilton-1acobi-Gleichung 125 
to 128. 
J ACOBI's equation, 1 acobische Gleichung 79-
J ACOBI's principle of least action.] acobisches 
Prinzip der kleinsten Wirkung 137. 139. 
}ACOBI's theorem, 1acobischer Satz 127, 128. 
Jump, Sprung 492. 
Jump condition, Sprungbedingung 233. 
Jump of solenoidal field, Sprung in einem 
Wirbelfeld 495-
KELVIN'S extension of HELMHOLTZ'S first 
vorticity theorem, Kelvins Erweiterung 
des ersten Wirbelsatzes von H elmholtz 387. 
KELVIN'S proofs of HELMHOLTz's vorticity 
theorems, Kelvinsehe Beweise der Helmholtzschen Wirbelsätze 409--410. 
KELVIN's theorem of hydrodynamics, Kelvinscher Satz der Hydrodynamik 711. 
- on impulsive motion, Kelvinscher 
Stoßsatz 97. 
- on irrotational motion, Kelvinscher 
Satz über Potentialströmung 3 57-3"58. 
- of minimum energy, vom Energieminimum 368. 
KELVIN's transformation see STOKEs'theorem. 
KELVIN-HELMHOLTZ'S theorem on irrotational motion, Kelvin-Helmho/tzseher Satz 
für Potentialströmung 393. 
Kelvin-Tait theorem, Kelvin-Taitscher Satz 280. 
Kepler problem, Kepler-Problem 49, 129. 
Kepler problem, relativistic, relativistisches 
Kepler-Problem 213. 
Kinematical compatibility condition for discontinuities, kinematische Kompatibilitätsbedingung für Unstetigkeilen 503 to 
506, 515. 
Kinematical line element, kinematisches Linienelement 13, 139, 200. 
Kinematical motion classes, kinematische 
Bewegungsklassen 431-432. 
Kinematical vorticity number, kinematisches 
Wirbelmaß 363-364, 382, 403-404. 
Kinematics, Kinematik 1, 12, 25. 
of continuous media, kontinuierlicher Medien 24{}--530. 
of diffusion, der Dilfusion 469. 
of line integrals, der Linienintegrale 34 5 to 
346. 
in space-time, in Raum und Zeit 200. 
of surface integrals, der Oberflächenintegrale 346-34 7. 
- of volume integrals, der Votumintegrale 34 7. 
Kinestate, Kinestat 383. 
Kinetic energy, kinetische Energie 3 5. 36, 39. 
44, 365-369, 377. 402, 482-491. 
Kinetic energy, theorems of KöNIG, kinetische 
Energie, Königsehe Sätze 36. 65, 484. 
Kinetic theory of gases, kinetische Gastheorie 2. 
- - of gas mixtures, kinetische Theorie der 
Gasmischungen 567-568, 612-614. 
Kinetics, Kinetik 1. 
Kinosthenie coordinate see ignorable coordinate. 
KIRCHHOFF's theorem on irrotational motion, 
K irchhotfscher Satz für Potentialströmung 
394. 
KLEIN's principle of geometry, Kleinsches 
Prinzip der Geometrie 454. 
KöNIG's theorems on the kinetic energy, Königsche Sätze über die kinetische Energie 36, 
65. 484. 
KoTCHINE's theorem on singularsurfaces, Kotschinseher Satz über singuläre Flächen 527. 
KowALEWSKI's integral, Kowalewskisches Integral 86. 
Kronecker delta, Kroneckersches Deltasymbol 
26. 
k-Vector, k- Vektor 661. 
k-Vector density, k-Vektordichte 661. 
k-Vector field, k- Vektorfeld 675-
Labaratory system, Laborsystem 71. 
Lagrange brackets, Lagrange-Klammern 151, 
170. 
Lagrange-Cauchy theorem on irrotational 
flow, Lagrange-Cauchyscher Satz für Potentialströmung 421, 712. 
Lagrange-d' Alembert principle, Lagranged'A lembertsches Prinzip 595-600. 
Lagrange function, Lagrange-Funktion 44, 60. 
105-106, 208, 212. 
Lagrange-Hamiltonian correspondence, Lagrange-H amilton- Obereinstimmung 11 5. 
Lagrange matrix, Lagrange-Matrix 152. 
LAGRANGE's criterion for a material surface, 
Lagrangesches Kriterium für eine materielle Fläche 3 39. 509. 
LAGRANGE's equations, Lagrangesche Gleichungen 58. 59. 93, 107, 109, 204seq., 208. 
LAGRANGE's particles (three-body problem), 
Lagrangesche Anordnung beim Dreikörperproblem 80. 
Lagrangian action, Lagrangesche Wirkung 
105. 107. 
Lagrangian central equation, Lagrangesche 
Zentralgleichung 604. 
Lagrangian derivative, Lagrangesche A bleitung 107. 
Lagrangian dynamics, Lagrangesche Dynamik 
108, 113, 204. 
Lagrangian form of relativistic dynamics, 
Lagrangesche Form der relativistischen Dynamik 204. 
Lagrangian, homogeneous, homogene Lagrange-Funktion 105, 137-139. 204, 212. 
-, ordinary, Lagrange-Funktion 44, 60, 105 
to 106, 208, 212. 
892 Subject Index. 
Lagrangian surface, Lagrangesche Fläche 116. 
Lamb curve, Lambsche Kurve 405. 
Lamb-Masotti form of BERNOULLr's theorem, 
Lamb-M asottische Form des Bernoullischen 
Satzes 408. 
Lamb plane, Lambsche Ebene 404-405. 
Lamb surface, Lambsche Fläche 404-405. 
Lamb vector, Lambscher Vektor 378, 402. 
LAMB's vorticity average theorem, Lambscher 
Wirbelmittelwertssatz 399. 
Lamellar acceleration field, lamellares Beschleunigungsfeld 388. 
Lamellar field, lamellares Feld 824-825. 
LAME's cone of shearing stress, Lamescher 
Schubspannungskegel 552. 
LAME's stress director quadric, Lamesche 
quadratische Form des reziproken Spannungstensors 5 52. 
LAME's stress ellipsoid, Lamesches Spannungsellipsoid 552. 
Laplacian expression for the speed of sound, 
Laplacescher Ausdruck für die Schallgeschwindigkeit 657. 713. 
Latent heat, latente Wärme 625. 
Lattice vibrations, Gitterschwingungen 81. 
Laws of classical mechanics, Gesetze der klassischen Mechanik 531. 
Laws of conservation (or of balance), Erhaltungssätze 232. 
Le Chatelier-Braun principle, Le ChatelierBraunsches Prinzip 659. 
Libration 103. 
Lie derivative, Liesche Ableitung 449, 458, 
460, 501. 
Line of magnetic flux, magnetische Flußlinie 
674. 
Line, material, materielle Linie 339. 
Line element of action, Linienelement der 
Wirkung 139. 
- -, kinematical, kinematisches 13, 139, 
200. 
Line integral, Bernoulli theorem, Linienintegral, Bernoullischer Satz 405-406. 
Line integrals, kinematics, Linienintegrale, 
Kinematik 345-346. 
Lineal motion, eindimensionale Bewegung 
329, 430, 584. 
Linear balance between deformation and rotation, lineare Bilanz zwischen Deformation und Rotation 397-399. 
Linear momentum see momentum. 
Linearly elastic body, linear-elastischer Körper 723-727. 
Linearly viscous fluid, linear-viskose Flüssigkeit 715-720. 
LrouvrLLE's theorem, Liouvillescher Satz 
172-174. 
Liouville type, system of, System vom Liouvilleschen Typ 129. 
Lissajous figures, Lissajoussche Figuren 52. 
Local rigidity, lokale Starrheit 259. 
Local speed of propagation, lokale FortPflanzungsgeschwindigkeit 508, 513. 
Longitudinal acceleration wave, longitudinale 
Beschleunigungswelle 524. 
Longitudinal discontinuity, longitudinale Unstetigkeit 492. 
Longitudinal wave in an elastic body, Longitudinalwelle im elastischen Körper 726-727. 
Lorentz force, Lorentz-Kraft 212, 690. 
Lorentz invariant constitutive equations of 
a moving dielectric, lorentzinvariante M aterialgleichungen eines bewegten Dielektrikums 738-739. 
Lorentz invariance see also world invariance. 
- of electromagnetic theory, LorentzInvarianz der elektromagnetischen Theorie 
681. 
Lorentz transformation, proper and im proper, 
Lorentz- Transformation, eigentliche und 
uneigentliche 10, 14, 198, 199. 200, 682. 
Magnetic field intensity, magnetische Feldstärke 674. 
Magnetic flux, magnetischer Fluß 667. 
- -, conservation, Erhaltung 660, 667. 
Magnetic flux density or magnetic induction, 
magnetische Flußdichte 672. 
Magnetic potential, magnetisches Potential674. 
Magnetization, Magnetisierung 683, 685-686. 
Magnetohydrodynamics, M agnetohydrodynamik 744. 
Mainardi= Codazzi-Gauss equations, Mainardi= Codazzi-Gaußsche Gleichungen 812. 
Mass, Masse 240. 
Mass conservation in a heterogeneaus medium, Masse, Erhaltungssatz für ein heterogenes Medium 472. 
Mass conservation law, Masse, Erhaltungssatz 464, 466--474. 
Mass, definition and dimension, Masse, Definition und Dimension 464. 
- and proper mass, und Ruhmasse 6, 202, 
203, 219. 
-, reduced, reduzierte 71, 72, 73. 
Masseeuter (see alsocenterofmass), Massenmittelpunkt 31, 221, 481, 532. 
- -, frame of reference, Schwerpunktssystem 71, 218. 
Mass density, Massendichte 465. 
Mass distribution, Massenverteilung 31. 
Mass flow, Massenstromdichte 467. 
Mass-point, Massenpunkt 465, 532. 
- and center of mass, und Schwerpunkt 483. 
Mass velocity, Massengeschwindigkeit 467. 
Material 243. 
Material constants, Malerialkonstanten 701. 
Material coordinates, materiefeste Koordinaten 326, 337-339. 
Material derivative, materielle Ableitung 337 
to 339, 341-343. 
- - in four dimensions, in vier Dimensionen 463. 
Material diffusion vector, materieller Diffusionsvektor 381. 
Material equation of continuity, materielle 
Kontinuitätsgleichung 467. 
Material indifference principle, Unabhängigkeit der Materialgleichungen vom Beobachter 702. 
Subject Index. 893 
Material line, materielle Linie 339. 
Material representation of a surface of di.scontinuity, materielle Darstellung einer 
Unstetigkeitsfläche 506--528. 
Materialsingular surfaces, materielle singuläre 
Flächen 519. 
Material surface, materielle Fläche 339 to 
340, 510-512. 
Material vector line, materielle Vektorlinie 
34ü--341. 
Material volume, materielles Volumen 339. 
Material vortex sheet, materielles Wirbelblatt 
515-517. 
Mathematical concepts in physics, mathematische Begrittsbildung in der Physik 231. 
MATHIEu's canonical transformation, Mathieusche kanonische Transformation 148. 
Matrices, orthogonal, orthogonale Matrizen 
15, 199. 
Matrix function, Matrizenfunktion 838-840. 
Matrix polynomial, Matrizenpolynom 838. 
Matrix power series, Potenzreihe aus Matrizen 
838. 
Maupertuis action, M aupertuissches Prinzip 
137. 
Maximum-minimum theorems for vorticity, 
Maximum-Minimum-Wirbelsätze 403 to 
404. 
Maximum stress, Maximalspannungen 577 to 
580. 
Maxwell-Bateman laws of electromagnetism, 
Maxwell-Ratemansche elektromagnetische 
Grundgesetze 667. 
Maxwell-Lorentz aether relations, MaxwellLorentzsche Ätherrelationen 660, 677-683. 
Maxwell-Morera stress functions, MaxwellMorerasche Spannungsfunktionen 587. 
MAXWELL's construction of streamlines, M axwellsche Konstruktion der Stromlinien 475. 
MAXWELL's relations of thermodynamics, 
· Maxwellsehe Relationen der Thermodynamik 629. 
MAXWELL's theorem on discontinuities, 
Maxwellscher Satz über Unstetigkeilen 494. 
Maxwellian dielectric, M axwellsches Dielektrikum 736--740. 
Maxwellian fluid, M axwellsche Flüssigkeit 
735. 
Mean pressure, mittlerer Druck 545. 
Mean rotation tensor, Tensor der mittleren 
Drehung 275-277. 
Mean values of stress, Mittelwerte der Spannung 568-569, 574-580. 
Measures of acceleration, Beschleunigungsmaße 378-379. 
Measure theoretical meaning of mass, maßtheoretische Bedeutung der Masse 465. 
Mechanical equilibrium of a mixture, mechanisches Gleichgewicht einer Mischung 
650. 
Mechanics, axioms of, Axiome der Mechanik 
230. 
·-, geometrical, geometrische 98, 215. 
in non-Euclidean spaces, in nichteuklidischen Räumen 606--607. 
Membrane, Membran 556. 
Membrane stress, Membranspanmmgsz·usland 
558. 560. 
Membranestress functions, Membran, Spannungsfunktionen 589--592. 
Metricin a surface, Metrik in einer Fläche 811. 
MIE's electromagnetic theory, Miesehe elektromagnetische Theorie 7 41 . 
MILNE's kinematical cosmology, Milnes kinematische Kosmologie 2. 
Minimal theorems in impulsive motion, Minimalsätze beim Stoß 96. 
Minimumstress intensity, theorems of PRATELLI, minimale Spannungsinlensität, Sätze von Pratelli 603. 
Minkowskian coordinates, Minkowskische 
Koordinaten 208, 209. 
Minkowskian space and time Coordinates, 
Minkowskische Raum- und Zeit-Koordinaten 198. 199. 208, 209. 
Mixtures, Mischungen 469--474, 567-568, 
612-614, 634-638. 645-650. 
Models, mathematical, of nature, mathematische Modelle der Natur 3. 8, 231. 
Molecular weight, Molekulargewicht 473. 
Moment of force, Moment einer Kraft 531. 
Moment, linear, lineares Moment 31. 
of momentum, Impulsmoment 482. 
- -, balance, Drehimpulsbilanz 531-532, 
546, 554. 692-693. 697. 
-, quadratic, quadratisches Moment 31. 
Momental ellipsoid, Trägheitsellipsoid 33. 
Moments of inertia, Trägheitsmomente 31, 
485-486. 
of stress, Momente der Spannungskomponenten 576--580. 
of a tensor field, eines Tensorfeldes 815. 
Momentum, electromagnetic, elektromagnetischer Impuls 689. 
-, generalized, generalisierter Impuls 62, 
607. 
-,linear, linearer Impuls 33, 56, 66, 110, 
481-491. 
Momentum balance, Impulsbilanz 531, 545, 
554. 691-698. 
Momentum-energy space, Impuls-EnergieRaum 130. 
Momentum-energy vector, Energie-ImpulsVektor 110, 114, 202, 696. 
MoNGE's potentials, Mangesehe Potentiale 
828. 
Motion, Bewegung 240, 325-463. 
Motions, une-dimensional, eindimensionale 
Bewegungen 46, 210. 
-, three-dimensional, dreidimensionale 53. 
-, two-dimensional, zweidimensionale 48. 
Motor 37. 68. 
Motor symbolism, Motorrechnung 68. 
Moving dielectric, constitutive equations, 
bewegtes Dielektrikum, M aterialgleichungen 738-739. 
Multiplication, exterior, äußere Multiplikation 
165. 
Mutual forces, gegenseitige Kräfte 533-534. 
Mutual Ioads, gegenseitige Belastungen 536. 
894 Subject Index. 
Natural time (relaxation time) of a viscous 
fluid, Zeitkonstante ( Relaxationszeit) einer 
viskosen Flüssigkeit 721. 
Navier-Poisson law of viscosity, NavierPoissonsches Viskositätsgesetz 716. 
n-body problem, n-Körperproblem 79. 
NEWTON's first and second law, Newtons 
Lex prima und Lex secunda 43, 45. 
NEWToN's law of gravitation, N ewtonsches 
Gravitationsgesetz 8. 
NEWTON's third law, Newtonslextertia 9, 10, 
37. 38, 57. 533-534. 
Newtonian absolute time, Newtonsehe absolute Zeit 4. 
Newtonian dynamics, Newtonsehe Dynamik 
1, 2, 3. 108. 
Newtonian dynamics of a partide, Newtonsehe Dynamik eines Teilchens 5. 6. - - of a system, eines Systems 8, 108. 
Newtonian relativity, Newtonsches Relativitätsprinzip 4 5. 
Non-holonomic constraints, nicht-holonome 
Zwangsbedingungen 606. 
Non-holonomic system, nicht-holonomes System 39. 59. 64, 65. 
Non-linearly viscous fluid, nichtlinear viskose 
Flüssigkeit 72ü--722. 
Non-polar case of stress, nichtpolarer Spannungszustand 538, 546. 
Normal component, J:Vormalkomponente 844. 
Normal co-ordinates, Normalkoordinaten 182. 
Normal form transformation, Normalfarmtransformation 191. 
Normal frequencies, Normalfrequenzen 2, 81, 
182. 
Normal matrix, Normalmatrix 842. 
Normal modes, Normalschwingungen 2, 81, 
180, 182. 
Normal projection, normale Projektion 796. 
Normal strains, Normalkomponenten der Verformung 267. 
Normal stress, Normalspannung 537, 544, 
574. 
Normal tensor, Normaltensor 810. 
Notation for derivatives in thermodynamics 
Bezeichnungen für Ableitungen in der 
Thermodynamik 622. 
Notation in field theory, Bezeichnungen in der 
Feldtheorie 235-239. 
Null cone, Lichtkegel 199. 
Null stress, Nulltensor der Spannung 547. 
Observer moving, bewegter Beobachter 443. 
Octahedral invariant, Oktaeder-/ nvariante 
834. 
ÜHM's law for moving conductors, Ohmsches 
Gesetz für bewegte Leiter 741-742. 
One-event characteristic function, vierdimensionale Wirkungsfunktion 215. 
One-point characteristic function, Wirkungsfunktion 121-123. 
Onsager reciprocity relations, Onsagersche 
Reziprozitätsbeziehungen 707. 
Operational method of BRIDGMAN, Operationsverfahren von Bridgman 4. 
Oriented bodies, orientierte Körper 309-325 
Origins of dassical field theories, Ursprung 
klassischer Feldtheorien 234. 
Orthogonal matrices, definitions, orthogonale 
Matrizen, Definitionen 15. 199. 
Oscillation, Schwingung 529. 
Oscillations, forced, erzwungene Schwingungen 
47. 189. -, small, kleine 180. 
Oscillations about steady motion, Schwingungen um eine stetige Bewegung 191. 
Oscillator, harmonic, harmonischer Oszillator 
46, 210. 
Paradox of EuLER and n'ALEMBERT, Paradoxon von Euter undd'Alembert 541-542. 
Partial entropy, Partialentropie 634. 
Partial internal energy, innere Partialenergie 
613. 
Partide explosion, Teilchenexplosion 21 7seq. 
Partide velocity, Teilchengeschwindigkeit 216. 
Partides, charged, in an electromagnetic 
field, geladene Teilchen in einem elektromagnetischen Feld 53, 212. 
-, free, freie Teilchen 9, 207, 216, 217. 
-,pair of, carrying electric charge, Teilchenpaar als Träger elektrischer Ladung 1 t. 
in a potential field, Teilchen in einem 
Potentialfeld 210seq. 
with spin, Teilchen mit Spin 222. 
Past, Vergangenheit 200. 
Path line, Bahnkurve 33ü-333. 340. 
Pendulous body, Pendelkörper 576. 
Pendulum, circular, Kreispendel 47. 
-, cydoidal, Zykloidenpendel 4 7. 
-, spherical, Kugelpendel 47, 52, 56. 
Perfeet fluid, vollkommene Flüssigkeit 233, 
71ü-715. 
Perfectly elastic body, vollkommen elastischer 
Körper 233. 
Perfectly plastic body, vollkommen plastischer 
Körper 233, 722-723. 
Perfectly soft body, vollkommen weicher Körper 723 . 
. Perihelion, Perihel 51. 
Permanence of matter, Permanenz der M aterie 243. 
of vortex lines and tubes, Beständigkeit 
der Wirbellinien und Wirbelröhren 387 to 
389, 41 t. 
Perturbations, Störungen 196. 
Perturbation series, Störungsreihen 3.09. 
Pfaffian form, Pfatfsche Form 163. 
Phase average, Phasenmittel 227. 
Phase space, Phasenraum 2, 100, 143, 167, 
191. 
Photon, frequency four-vector, Photon, Frequenz-Vierervektor 203, 217. 
Physical basis of continuous theories, physikalische Grundlage der Kontinuitätstheorien 228. 
Physical components of stress, physikalische 
Spannungskomponenten 544. 
- of a tensor, physikalische Komponenten eines Tensors 799, 802-805. 
Subject Index. 895 
Physical dimensions, physikalische Dimensionen 799. 
Piezotropic material, piezotrope Substanz 634. 
Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, Piola-Kirchhoffscher Spannungstensor 553. 
PIOLA's theorem on virtual work, Piolascher 
Satz über die virtuelle Arbeit 596---597. 
Plane of motion, Bewegungsebene 329. 
Plane motion, ebene Bewegung 329, 430. 
-, stream function, Strömungspotential 
474-477-
-, vorticity theorem of n' ALEMBERT, 
Wirbelsatz von d'Alembert 421. 
Plane of shear, Ebene der Scherung 292. 
Plane strain, ebener Verformungszustand 284 
to 285. 
Plane stress, ebener Spannungszustand 582 to 
584. 
Plastic flow, plastisches Fließen 722. 
Plastic potential, plastisches Potential 723. 
Plasticity, Plastizität 722-723. 
Plate, Platte 556. 
POINCARE's vorticity average theorem, Poincarescher w irbelmittelwertssatz 399. 
Poinsot ellipsoid, Poinsotellipsoid 83. 85. 
Point transformation, Punkttransformation 
149. 
Poisson brackets, Poisson-Klammern 151, 
170. 
Poisson-J acobi identity, Poisson-] acobi-1 dentität 151, 172. 
Poisson-Kelvin equivalent charge distribution, Poisson-Kelvinsche äquivalente Ladungsverteilung 685. 
Poisson matrix, Poisson-M atrix 152. 
Poisson theorem, Poissonsches Theorem 153. 
Polarization charge, Polarisationsladung 684. 
Polarization current, Polarisationsstrom 685, 
686. 
Polarization of a dielectric, Polarisation eines 
Dielektrikums 683-685. 
Polhode, Polhodie 83, 85. 
Polynomial of matrices, Polynom aus 1'.1atrizen 838. 
Polynomials, interlocked, ineinandergreifende 
Polynome 187. 
Potential of a conservative field, Potential 
eines konservativen Feldes 665-666. 
Potential deformation, Potentialdeformation 
277, 283. 
Potential energy, poiefl.tieqe Energie 42, 210. 
- - of stress, plltentielle Spannungsenergie 
571. 
Potential flow past a cylinder, Potentialströmung hinter einem Zylinder 332-336. 
Potential transformations, Potentialtransformationen 666. 
Potentials, electromagnetic, elektromagnetische Potentiale 212, 674. 
-, thermodynamic, thermodynamische Potentiale627 to 629. 
Power, Leistung 44, 569-570. 
-, non-mechanical, nicht-mechanische 608. 
Power series of matrices, Potenzreihe aus M atrizen 838. 
Powers of a tensor, Potenzen eines Tensors 
837. 
of a vector, eines Vektors 796. 
l'oynting vector, Poynt·ing- Vektor 690. 
l'recession, steady, gleichmäßige Präzession 
88. 
Preferred directions, Vorzugsrichtungen 309. 
Preferred frame, Vorzugssystem 443. 
Pressure, Druck 537. 545. 
Pressure co-efficient, Druckkoelfizient 623. 
Principal axes of elongation, Hauptachsen 
der Elongation 281. 
-- of inertia, Hauptträgheitsachsen 32, 33, 
36, 485-486. 
- of strain, Hauptachsen des V erformungszustandes 260, 274. 281. 
- of stress, Hauptspannungsachsen 551. 
- of a tensor quadric, Hauptachsen der 
quadratischen Form eines Tensors 251. 
Principal co-ordinate system of a tensor, 
Hauptachsensystem eines Tensors 832. 
Principal curvatures, Hauptkrümmungen 813. 
Principal extension of a shear, Hauptdehnungen einer Scherung 294. 
Principal extensions, small, kleine Hauptdehnungen 303-308. 
Principal function see two-point characteristic function. 
Principal invariants of a tensor, Hauptinvarianten eines Tensors 832-836. 
Principal moments of inertia, Hauptträgheitsmomente 32, 33. 485. 
Principal stresses, Rauptspannungen 551. 
Principal stretches, Hauptdehnungen 261. 
Principal Stretchings, Hauptstreckungen 349, 
441. 
Principal torsion-flexure axes, Hauptachsen 
für Torsionsbiegung 318. 
Principal trajectories of a tensor field, Haupttrajektorien eines Tensorfeldes 84 7. 
Principle of duality, first, erstes Dualitätsprinzip 242, 246. - -, second, zweites Dualitätsprinzip 263. 
Principle of equipresence, Prinzip der Aquipräsenz 703-704. - of impenetrability, der Undurchdringlichkeil 244, 325. 
- of LAGRANGE and D' ALEMBERT, von Lagrange und d'Alembert 595-600. 
of least action, der kleinsten Wirkung 107, 
110, 204, 205, 604. 
of least constraint, des kleinsten Zwanges 
605-606. 
of virtual work, der virtuellen Arbeit 595 
to 600. 
- -, its converse, seine Umkehrung 602 
to 603. 
Principles for constitutive equations, Prinzipien für Materialgleichungen 700-704. 
Probability density, Wahrscheinlichkeitsdichte 
17 5· 
Production of entropy, Entropieerzeugung 
638-647. 
Products of inertia, Deviationsmomente 31, 
486. 
896 Subject Index. 
Projection, stereographic, stereographische 
Projektion 21, 24. 
Proper mass, see mass. 
Proper numbers of a tensor, Eigenwerte eines 
Tensors 829. 
Proper time, Eigenzeit 6, 200. 
Proper vector, Eigenvektor 829. 
Pseudo-Iineal motion, pseudolineale Bewegung 
329. 430. - - -, stream function, Strömungspotential 477. 
Pseudo-plane motion, pseudo-ebene Bewegung 
329, 430. 
Pseudo-stresses, Pseudospannungen 553. 
Pure normal stress, reiner Normalspannungszustand 537-538. 
Pure shearing stress, reiner Schubspannungszustand 537. 545. 551. 
Pure strain, reine Dehnung 2 7 5, 281, 283. 
- -, small, kleine 305. 
Quadric of stretching, quadratische Form des 
Streckungstensors 349. 
- of a tensor, eines Tensors 250-253. 259. 
Quantum mechanics, Quantenmechanik 1-3. 
Quaternions, Quaternionen 21, 25, 28. 
Radius of gyration, Trägheitsradius 31. 
Rankine-Hugoniot equation, Rankine-Hugoniotsche Gleichung 711, 713. 
Rate of deformation tensor, Deformationsgeschwindigkeitstensor 348. 
- of strain, Deformationsgeschwindigkeit 369 
· to 374. 
Rays see trajectories. 
Reaction rate, Reaktionsgeschwindigkeit 473. 
Reciprocal directors, reziproke Direktoren 311. 
Reciprocal quadric of a tensor, reziproke 
quadratische Form eines Tensors 251. 
Reciprocal relations of thermodynamics, 
reziproke Relationen der Thermodynamik 
629. 
Redprocity theorem of Hamiltonian and Lagrangian dynamics, Reziprozitätssatz der 
Hamittonsehen und Lagrangeschen Dynamik 116. 
Reconcilable circuits, ineinander überführbare 
geschlossene Wege 103. 
Recoverable work, wiedergewinnbare Arbeit 
639. 641-642. 
Rectilinear shearing, geradlinige Scherungsbewegung 36ü-361, 432. 
Rectilinear vortex, geradlinige Wirbelbewe-· 
gung 361-362, 389, 432. 
Reduced free enthalpy, reduzierte freie Enthalpie 638. 
Reducible circuit, reduzibler geschlossener 
Weg 103, 104. 
Reduction of energies to normal form, Reduktion von Energien auf Normalform 180. 
- of order, der Ordnung 158, 161, 162, 163, 
170. 
Reiner-Rivlin fluids, Reiner-Rivlinsche Flüssigkeiten 720-722. 
Relative frame, Relativsystem 71. 
Relative motion, Relativbewegung 437-463. 
Relative spin, relative Drehgeschwindigkeit 
353. 441. 
Relative tensor, Relativtensor 661. 
Relative wryness of an oriented body, relative Schiefheit eines orientierten Körpers 
312-313. 
Relativistic catastrophes, relativistische Katastrophen 21 7. 
Relativistic dynamics, relativistische Dynamik 
1, 2, 108, 198. 
-, interaction, Wechselwirkung 10. 
- of a particle, eines Teilchens 5. 6, 198. 
- of a system, eines Systems 8, 108, 204. 
Relativity, general, theory of EINSTEIN, allgemeine Relativität, Theorie von Einstein 2. 
-, Newtonian, Newtonsches Relativitätsprinzip 45. 
Relativity principle of GALILEO, Relativitätsprinzip von Galilei 491, 535. 
Resolution of a displacement with small gradients, Auflösung einer Verschiebung mit 
kleinen Gradienten 306. 
Resonance, Resonanz 47, 189. 
Restitution coefficient, Wiederherstellungskoelfizient 94, 95. 
- period, Wiederherstellungsperiode 95. 
Rheonomic system, rheonomes System 35, 39. 
Riemann-Christoffel tensor, Riemann-Christolfelscher Tensor 271-273. 
Riemannian space, Riemannscher Raum 106. 
Rigid body, starrer Körper 8, 12, 82-92, 
233. - -, its constitutive equations, Materialgleichungen 704-705. 
- -, displacement, starrer Körper, Verrückung 14, 65, 199. - - under no forces, starrer Körper, kräftefrei 82. 
- - turning about a fixed point, starrer 
Körper, Drehung um einen festen Punkt 
68, 82-92. 
Rigid deformation, starre Deformation 259, 
265, 283. - - of an oriented body, eines orientierten 
Körpers 312-313. 
Rigid motion, starre Bewegung 350-352, 
355. 431. - -, body-fixed coordinates, körperfeste 
Koordinaten 486. 
- -, world-invariant definition, Lorentzinvariante Definition 457. 
Rigid rotating frame, starres rotierendes Bezugssystem 437. 
Rigid rotation, starre Drehung 274. 
Rigor, mathematical, in physics, mathematische Strenge in der Physik 231. 
Rivlin-Ericksen tensor, Rivlin-Ericksenscher 
Tensor 383. 
Rod, Stab 309--310. 
Rads, equilibrium state, Stäbe, Gleichgewichtszustand 564-567. 
-, history of strain description, Geschichte 
der Beschreibung ihrer Verformung 319 to 
320. 
Subject Index. 897 
Rods, strain of, Stäbe, Verformung 315-320. 
Rolling contacts, rollende Berührung (ohne 
Gleiten) 38. 
Rotating rigid frame, rotierendes starres Bezugssystem 437-
Rotation, Drehung 12, 15, 17, 20, 23, 25, 36, 
104. 
- of a cylinder, Rotation eines Zylinders 550. 
-, finite, endliche Drehung 274-283. 
-, infinitesimal, infinitesimale 25, 27. 
about a point, um einen Punkt 13. 
- of a rigid body, Rotation eines starren 
Körpers 82, 575-
-, small, kleine Drehung 305-308. 
Rotationally symmetric motion, rotationssymmetrische Bewegung 329, 431. 
- -, stream function, Strömungspotential 478-479- - -, vorticity theorem of SvANBERG, 
Wirbelsatz von Svanberg 421. 
Rotationally symmetric stress, rotationssymmetrischer Spannungszustand 587-588. 
Routhian function, Routhsche Funktion 61. 
Rutherford scattering formula, Rutherfordsche Streuformel 77. 
Scattering, Streuung 71, 76. 
Scattering angle, Streuwinkel 72. 
Scattering cross section, differential, differentieller Streuquerschnitt 7 5, 77. 
- - -, total, gesamter 76. 
Scattering, zero-scattering, Streuung ohne 
effektive Ablenkung 76. 
Schrödinger equation, Schrödinger-Gleichung 
3. 
Scleronomic system, skleronomes System 39-
Screw field, Schraubenfeld 826-828. 
Screw motion, Schraubenbewegung 392-393, 
404, 408, 431. 
Second fundamental form of surface theory, 
zweite Fundamentalform der Flächentheorie 
812. 
Second law of thermodynamics, zweiter 
Hauptsatz der Thermodynamik 643-647. 
Semi-holonomic system, semi-holonomes System 39-
Separation of variables, Separation der V ariablen 128, 17 5-
Servo-mechanism, automatischer Kontrollmechanismus 65. 
Shear, Scherung 256-257, 258-259, 267. 
- of a circular cylinder, eines Kreiszylinders 
299-300. 
Shear components of a tensor, Scherungskomponenten eines Tensors 844. 
Shear composition, Scherungen, Zusammensetzung 296. 
Shear cone of a tensor, Scherungskegel eines 
Tensors 251. 
Shear, generalized, generalisierte Scherung 
297- -, maximum and minimum, maximale und 
minimale Scherung 263. 
- of a sphere, Scherung einer Kugel 302. 
Shear intensity, Scherungsstärke 266. 
Handbuch der Physik, Bd. III/1. 
Shear strains, Scherungskomponenten 267. 
Shear trajectories of a tensor field, Scherungslinien eines Tensorfeldes 84 7. 
Shear viscosity, Scherungsviskosität 718. 
Shearing, Scherungsgeschwindigkeit 348, 431. 
Shearing force, Schubkraft 566. 
Shearing plane, Gleitebene 292. 
Shearing stress, Schubspannung 537, 544. 
- -, maximum, maximale 551. 
Shell, Schale 310, 311. 
Shell theory, relation to three-dimensional 
theory, Schalentheorie, Zusammenhang 
mit der dreidimensionalen Theorie 560 to 
564. 
Shells, equilibrium state, Schalen, Gleichgewichtszustand 556-564. 
-, strain of, Verformung 320-325. 
Shifter, Parallelverschiebungsoperator 807. 
Shock surface, Stoßfront 514. 
Shock wave, Stoßwelle 512-513, 519-522, 
546, 610, 711, 714-715-
SIGNORINI'S stress inequality, Signorinische 
Spannungsungleichung 578. 
Simple extension, einfache Dehnung 291 to 
292. 
Simple shear, einfache Scherung 292-296. 
Simple shearing, ebene gleichförmige Scherungsbewegung 360, 432. 
Simple shearing stress, einfacher Schubspannungszustand 551. 
Simple tension, einfache Zugspannung 551. 
Singular surfaces, balance theorems, singuläre Flächen, Bilanzsätze 526-528. 
-, compatibility conditions, Kompatibilitätsbedingungen 493-494, 496-498, 503 
to 506, 515. 
-, definition, Definition 492. 
-, general classification, allgemeine Klassifikation 51 7-519. 
-- of higher order than second, höherer 
als zweiter Ordnung 524-525. 
-, material, materielle 519. 
- of second order, zweiter Ordnung 523 
to 524. 
-, transport theorem, Transportsatz 525 
to 526. 
Singularity of mass density, Singularität der 
Massendichte 466. 
Skew symmetric see antisymmetric, schiefsymmetrisch s. antisymmetrisch. 
Slip surface, Gleitflächen 512. 
Slippage tensor, Gleittensor 372-373-
Small deformation, kleine Deformation 303 to 
309. 
Small displacement, kleine V errückung 308. 
Small displacement gradients, kleine Verrückungsgradienten 306. 
Small principal extensions, kleine Hauptdehnungen 303-308. 
Small pure strain, kleine reine Dehnung 305. 
Small rotation, kleine Drehung 305-308. 
Small strain, historical remarks, kleine Deformationen, historische Bemerkungen 270. 
Smallness, the meaning of, Kleinheit, Begriffsbestimmung 303, 309. 
57 
898 Subject Index. 
Solenoidal field, divergenzfreies Feld 819 to 
824, 827. 
Sound, speed see speed of sound. 
Sound waves, HUGONIOT's theorem, Schallwellen, Hugoniotscher Satz 712. 
Source equivalence, Quellenäquivalenz 469. 
Sources and vortices as elements of motion, 
Quellen und Wirbel als Bewegungselemente 
364-365. 
Space, absolute, absoluter Raum 6, 43. 
-, configuration space, Konfigurationsraum 
2, 13, 100, 134. 
of events (space-time), Ereignisraum 
(Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum) 105. 
of FINSLER, Finsterscher Raum 106. 
of momentum and energy, Energie-Impulsraum 130. 
-, Riemannian, Riemannscher Raum 106. 
and space-time, homogeneity and isotropy, Raum und Raum-Zeitkontinuum; 
Homogenität und Isotropie 9. 10. 
of states, Zustandsraum 100, 163. 
- and energy, Energie-Zustandsraum 
100, 143, 169. 
Space metric, Raummetrik 455. 
Space tensor derived from world tensor, 
Raumtensor aus Welttensor abgeleitet 456. 
Space-time, Raumzeitkontinuum 105, 666. 
-, curved, gekrümmtes 1. 
-, flat, ebenes 1. 
Spaces, definitions and special kinds, Räume, 
Definitionen und spezielle Arten 100, 105, 
130, 134, 143, 163, 169. -, representative (listed), repriisentative (Zusammenstellung) 100, 104. 
Spatial Bernoulli theorem, räumlicher Bernoullischer Satz 408-409. 
Spatial co-ordinates, raumfeste Koordinaten 
326, 337-339. 
Spatial continuity equation, riiumliche Kontinuitiitsgleichung 342, 467. 
Spatial diffusion vector, riiumlicher Dilfusionsvektor 381. 
Spatial equation of continuity, riiumliche 
Kontinuitätsgleichung 342, 467. 
Spatial representation of a surface of discontinuity, räumliche Darstellung einer 
Unstetigkeitsflache 506-528. 
Special motion types, spezielle Bewegungstypen 328-329, 430-437 
Special relativity, spezielle Relativitiitstheorie 
697-698. 
Specific energy, Poisson equations, spezifische Energie, Poissonsche Gleichungen 402 
to 404. 
Specific entropy, spezifische Entropie 619. 
- -,total, of a mixture, totale, einer Mischung 634. 
Specific heats, spezifische Wärmen 624-627, 
630-632. - -, generalized theory, generalisierte Theorie 625-627. 
Specific inner energy, total, of a mixture, 
totale spezifische innere Energie einer Mischung 634. 
Specific internal energy, spezifische innere 
Energie 609. 
Specific kinetic energy, spezifische kinetische 
Energie 377, 402. 
Speed, Geschwindigkeitsbetrag 25, 201, 216, 
328. 
Speed of displacement of a surface, Geschwindigkeit der Verschiebung einer Fliicke 498 
to 499, 506. 
Speed of light in a dielectric, Lichtgeschwindigkeit im Dielektrikum 739. 
- - in vacuum, im Vakuum 679. 
Speed of propagation, Fortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit 508-509, 514. 
- - of a shock, einer Stoßfront 521. 
Speed of sound, Schallgeschwindigkeit 657, 
713. 
Speeds of sound in an elastic body, Schallgeschwindigkeiten im elastischen Körper 
727. 
Speed of a surface, Geschwindigkeit einer Fläche 676. 
Spherical pendulum, Kugelpendel 47, 52, 56. 
Spherical polar co-ordinates, Kugelkoordinaten 27. 
Spherical tensor, Kugeltensor 834. 
Spin of higher order, Drehbeschleunigung erster und höherer Ordnung 384-385. 
Spin matrices of PAULI, Pauliscke Spinmatrizen 23, 24. 
Spintensor of CAUCHY, Drehgeschwindigkeitstensor von Caucky 353-360, 441. - - of rigid motion, für starre Bewegung 
355. 
Stability, Stabilität 141. 
of equilibrium, des Gleichgewichtes 653 to 
659. - of a sleeping top, eines symmetrischen 
Kreisels ohne Priizession 89. 
Staeckel type system, System vom Staeckeltyp 129. 
Stagnation point, Umkehrpunkt 328. 
Stark-effect, Stark-Effekt 130. 
Statically determinate problem, statisch bestimmtes Problem 580-582. 
Statics, Statik 1. 
Stationary boundary of motion, feste Randfliicke der Bewegung 330. 
Statistical mechanics, statistische M eckanik 
175-
Steady motion, stationäre Bewegung 328, 339. 
343, 431, 442-443. 467. 
- - with steady density, mit stationärer 
Dickte 343, 431, 487, 489. 
Steady quantity, stationäre Größe 328. 
Steady streamlines, stationäre Stromlinien 
341, 431. 
Steady vortex lines, stationäre Wirbellinien 
391. 
Steady vorticity motion, stationäre Wirbelbewegung 391, 431. 
STEFAN's relations for diffusion, Stefanscke 
Beziehungen für die Dilfusion 707. 
Stereographie projection, stereographische 
Profektion 21, 24. 
Subject Index. 899 
Stoechiometric coefficients, stöchiometrische 
Koeffizienten 473. 
Stokes-ChristoHel condition for shocks, Stokes-Christoffelsche Bedingung für Stoßwellen 522. 
STOKES' potentials, Stokessehe Potentiale 828 
to 829. 
STOKEs' theorem, Stokesscher Satz 356--357. 
386, 816--817. - - seealso KELVIN's transformation. 
Stokesian fluid, Stokessehe Flüssigkeit 721. 
Strain, Verformungszustand 240, 25 5. 
Strain composition, Deformationen, Zusammensetzung 282-283. 
Strain ellipsoid, Verformungsellipsoid 259. 
261. 
Strain energy, Deformationsenergie 571, 598 
to 599. 641-642. 
- - and internal energy, und innere Energie 611-612. 
Strain invariants, Verformungsinvarianten 
264-266. 
Strain magnitude, Verformungsgröße 266. 
Strain measures, equivalence, Verzerrungsmaße, Äquivalenz 268-269. 
-, logarithmic, logarithmische 269--270, 
271. 
-, special, besondere 269, 271. 
Strain of orientation, Verformungszustand 
der Orientierung 313, 314. 
-- of volume, Dilatation des Volumens 266. 
Strain tensor, Deformationstensor 266. 
Strain theory, historical remarks, Deformationstheorie, historische Bemerkungen 270 
to 271. 
Streak line 33ü--333. 
Stream function, Stromfunktion 474 to 481. 
--- for plane motion, für ebene Bewegung 
474-477. -- -- for pseudo-lineal motion, für pseudolineale Bewegung 477. 
- - for rotationally symmetric motion, 
für rotationssymmetrische Bewegung 478 
to 479. 
- - for three-dimensional motion, für 
dreidimensionale Bewegung 479--480. 
- for two-dimensional motion, für zweidimensionale Bewegung 477-479. 
Stream line, Stromlinie 330-333. 
Stream sheet, Stromblatt 331. 
Strength of a vortex, Stärke eines Wirbels 
362, 387-389. 411. 
Stress deviator, Spannungsdeviator 545. 
Stress, dissipative part, Spannungen, dissipativer Anteil 571, 640. 
--, geometrical representations, Spannungszttstand, geometrische Darstellungen 552. 
--, thermodynamic definition, Spannungen, 
thermodynamische Definition 6 51. 
Stress ellipsoids of CAUCHY and LAME, 
Spannungsellipsoide von Cauchy und 
Lame 552. 
Stress-energy-momentum tensor, vierdimensionaler Spannungstensor 696. 
Stress function, Spannungsfunktion 582 to 
594. 
Stress functions for general motion, Spannungsfunktionen für allgemeine Bewegung 
592-594. 
- - for membranes, für Membranen 589bis 
592- - - for flat spaces, für ebene Räume 585 to 
586. 
Stress impulse, Spannungsstoß 549. 
Stress invariants, Spannungstensor, Invarianten 551. 
Stress means, Spannungsmittelwerte 568 to 
569. 574-580. 
Stress-momentum-tensor, Spannungs-Impuls-Tensor 555. 
Stress notations, Spannungskomponenten, 
Bezeichnungen 548. 
Stress power, Spannungsleistung 570, 638. 
Stress principle, Spannungsprinzip 537-538. 
- - for rods, für Stäbe 565. 
- - for shells, für Schalen 556--557. 
Stress quadrics, quadratische Formen zum 
Spannungstensor 552. 
Stress resultant, Längskraft 565. 
Stress-strain relations, Spannungs-Verformungs-Beziehungen 641. 
Stress tensor, Spannungstensor 542-544. 
- -, electromagnetic, elektromagnetischer 
689. 
Stress trajectories, Spannungstrajektorien 
552. 
Stress vector, Spannungsvektor 537. 542 to 
543. 546. 
Stretch, Dehnung 255-256, 257. 26ü--262, 
266--267, 274. 
-, finite, endliche 369. 
Stretching, Streckung ( Streckgeschwindigkeit) 
348, 369. 
of higher order, höherer Ordnung 384 to 
385. 
and spin, basic identity, und Drehgeschwindigkeit, grundlegende Identität 380. 
of vortex lines, der Wirbellinien 429 to 
430. 
Stretching tensor of EuLER, Streckungstensor 
von Euler 347-352. 
String, Saite 565. 
-,loaded, belastete 81, 82. 
Structure, mathematical, of mechanics, mathematische Struktur der Mechanik 98. 
Structures, periodic, periodische Strukturen 
81. 
ST. VENANT's compatibility conditions for 
small strain, St. V enantsche Kompatibilitätsbedingungen für kleine Deformationen 
306. 
Submerged body, untergetauchter Körper 540. 
Substantial see also material. 
Substantial constant, substantielle Konstante 
339. 
Sum of tensors, Summe von Tensoren 808. 
Summation convention, Summationsübereinkunft 100. 
57* 
900 Subject Index. 
Superficial Bernoulli theorem, Bernoullischer 
Satz für eine Fläche 407-408. 
Superficial conditions of compatibility, singuläre Flächen,, Kompatibilitätsbedingungen 493-494, 496--498, 503-506, 515. 
Superposahle motions, superpanierbare Bewegungen 396. 
Superposition theorem for strain, Superpositionssatz für Deformationen 308. 
SuPINo's theorems on irrotational motion, 
Supinasehe Sätze für Potentialströmung 
395. 
Supply, Erzeugung 468-469, 472. 
of energy, spezifische Energieerzeugung 
609. - of momentum in a mixture, Impulserzeugung in einer Mischung 567. 
Surface charge, Oberflächenladung 683-684. 
Surface current, Oberflächenstrom 683-684. 
Surface element, deformation, Flächenelement, Deformation 247-249, 263. 
- -,material derivative, materielle Ableitung 341-342. 
Surface integrals, kinematics, Oberflächenintegrale, Kinematik 346--347. 
Surface metric, Flächenmetrik 811. 
Surface theory, Flächentheorie 812-813. 
Surface of constant curvature, Fläche konstanten Krümmungsmaßes 590. 
- of discontinuity, Unstetigkeitsfläche 233. 
610. -, material, materielle Fläche 339---340. 
- of revolution, Rotationsfläche 591. 
Surfaces of maximum shear of a tensor field, 
Flächen maximaler Scherung eines Tensorfeldes 848, 850. 
SVANBERG's vorticity theorem for rotationally symmetric motion, Svanbergscher 
Wirbelsatz für rotationssymmetrische Bewegung 421. 
Symbols frequently used, häufig benutzte 
Zeichen 235-239. 
Symmetry of the stress tensor, Symmetrie 
des Spannungstensors 546, 569. 
Symplectic transformation, symplektische 
Transformation 146. 
System, closed, abgeschlossenes System 9. 
-, conservative, konservatives 100, 167. 
-, degenerate, entartetes 179. 183, 191. 
-, holonomical, holonomes 38, 60. 
--, isolated, isoliertes 9. 
- of Liouville type, vom Liouville-Typ 129, 
172. 
-, non-conservative, nichtkonservatives 170. 
-, non-holonomic, nicht holonomes 39, 59, 
64, 65. 
-, rheonomic, rheonomes 35, 39. 
-, scleronomic, skleronomes 39. 
-, semi-holonomic, semi-holonomes 39. 
- of Staeckel type, vom Staeckel-Typ 129, 
172. 
Systems without constraints, Systeme ohne 
Zwang 69---82. 
SZEBEHELY's unsteadiness number, Szebehelysche Zahl 379. 432. 
Tangent vector, Tangentenvektor 810. 
Tangential projection, tangentiale Projektion 
796. 
Tautochrone 48. . 
Temperature, Temperatur 619. 621. 
Tension, Zug 537. 551, 566, 574. 
Tensor of inertia, Trägheitstensor 31, 33. 
485-486, 490. 
Tensor invariants, Tensorinvarianten 832 to 
836. 
Tensor lines, Tensorlinien 847. 
Tensor sheet, Tensorblatt 847. 
Tensor sum, Tensorensumme 808. 
Tensors, geometrical representation, Tensoren, geometrische Darstellung 25ü--255. 
Theorem of KöNIG, Königscher Satz 36, 65, 
484. - of parallel axes, Steincrseher Satz 32. 
Thermal conductivity, Wärmeleitfähigkeit 709. 
Thermal equation of state, thermische Zustandsgleichung 623. 
Thermal isotropy, thermische Isotropie 709. 
Thermodynamic degeneracy, thermodynamische Entartung 633-634. 
Thermodynamic diagrams, thermodynamische 
Diagramme 620, 623. 
Thermodynamic equilibrium, thermodynamisches Gleichgewicht 647-660. 
Thermodynamic flux, thermodynamischer 
Fluß 643, 646. 
Thermodynamic force, thermodynamische 
Kraft 643. 
Thermodynamic identities, thermodynamische I dentitäten 629---632. 
Thermodynamic inequalities, thermodynamische Ungleichungen 652-659. 
Thermodynamic paths, thermodynamische 
Wege 624. 
Thermodynamic potentials, thermodynamische Potentiale 627-629. 
Thermodynamic pressure, thermodynamischer Druck 621, 636. 638. 
Thermodynamic state, thermodynamischer 
Zustand 620. 
Thermodynamic substate, thermodynamischer 
Unterzustand 618-619. 
Thermodynamic tensions, thermodynamische 
Intensitätsgrößen 621. 
Thermostatics, Thermostatik 615-660. 
Thin body, dünner Körper 309. 
Three-body problem, Dreikörperproblem 80. 
Three-dimensional motion, stream function, 
dreidimensionale Bewegung, Strömungspotential 4 7 9---480. 
Time derivatives of scalar integrals over 
moving regions, Zeitableitungen skalarer 
Integrale über bewegte Gebiete 67 5. 
Time flux, convected, zeitlicher, mitgeschleppter Fluß 448-452. 
- -, co-rotational, im mitrotierenden Bezugssystem 445. 451-452. - -, invariant, in four dimensions, invarianter, in vier Dimensionen 459. 
Time, introduction into field theory, Zeit, 
Einführung in die Feldtheorie 325. 
Subject Index. 901 
Top, spinning, rotierender Kreisel 85. 
-, symmetrical, symmetrischer 85, 87, 88. 
--, unsymmetrical, unsymmetrischer 85. 
Topological remarks, topalogische Bemerkungen 102. 
Torque, Drehmoment 531. 
Torque exerted by a rigid obstacle, Drehmoment, das von einem Hindernis ausgeübt wird 540. 
Torsion 298-300, 318. 
of a circular cylinder, eines Kreiszylinders 
299-300. 
of a sphere einer Kugel 302. 
of streamlines, Windung von Stromlinien 
376. 
of vector lines see abnormality. 
Torsional stress, tordierter Spannungszustand 
588. 
Torsionless stress, torsionsfreier Spannungszustand 588. 
Torsor 37. 68. 
Total covariant, derivative, totale kovariante 
Ableitung 246--247, 810-813. 
Total energy, Gesamtenergie 609. 
Total entropy, Gesamtentropie 642. 
Total squared speed, totales Geschwindigkeitsquadrat 365-369. 
Total of a tensor field, Totale eines Tensorfeldes 815. 
Trajectories, Bahnen 107, 111, 121, 134,215. 
- of a tensor field, Trajektorien eines Tensorfeldes 84 7. 
Trajectory, parabolic, parabolische Bahn 48. 
Transfer of energy, non-mechanical, nichtmechanische Energieübertragung 608. 
- of momentum, Impulsübertragung 549 to 
sso. 
Transformation, canonical, kanonische Transformation 144, 154, 157. 168, 169, 170. 
-, contact transformation, Berührungstransformation 124, 144. 
-, continuous (definitions) kontinuierliche 
Transformation (Definitionen) 103. 
·-- in normal form, Transformation in Normalform 191. 
-, point transformation (extended), Punkttransformation (erweiterte) 149. 
·-, symplectic, symplektische Transformation 
146. 
Translation, 12, 274, 350. 
Transport theorem, Transportsatz 347. 
Transversal, Extremal-Normale 123. 
Transversal discontinuity, transversale U nstetigkeit 492. 
Transverse acceleration wave, transversale 
Beschleunigungswelle 524. 
Transverse contraction ratio, Querkontraktionszahl 291. 
Transverse wave, transversale Welle 525. 
- - in an elastic body, Transversalwelle 
im elastischen Körper 726--727. 
Tri-axial stress, dreiachsiger Spannungszustand 551. 
True charge see free charge. 
Truncation number 721. 
Twistper unit length, Verwindung 298, 318. 
Twisting moment, Drillmoment 566. 
Two-body problem, Zweikörperproblem 69. 
Two-dimensional motion, stream function, 
zweidimensionale Bewegung, Strömungspotential 477-479· 
Two-event characteristic function, vierdimensionales Eikonal 209. 
Two-point characteristic function Eikonal 
117-121, 137, 138. 
Ultrastability, Ultrastabilität 6 58. 
Undeformed material, undeformiertes M aterial 244. 
Uniform dilatation, gleichförmige Dilatation 
29ü-291. 
Unimodular condition, unimodulare Bedingung 22, 1 SO. 
Unit of charge, Einheit der Ladung 666. 
Unit transformation, Einheitstransformation 
660. 
Unsteadiness number of Szebehely, Szebehelysche Zahl 379. 432. 
van der Waals gas, van der Waalssches Gas 
632-633. 
Variation of constants, Variation der Konstanten 197. 
Variational condition of thermodynamic 
equilibrium, Variationsbedingung des 
thermodynamischen Gleichgewichtes 650 to 
652. 
Va.riational principles of mechanics, Variationsprinzipien der Mechanik 107, 111, 
139, 594-607. 
Vector, absolute and relative rates of change, 
Vektor, absolutes und relatives Maß der 
Anderung 29. 
Vector line, Vektorlinie 817. 
- -, material, materielle 34ü-341. 
Vector potential see magnetic potential, 
Vektorpotential s. magnetisches Potential 
674. 
Vector sheet, Vektorblatt 817. 
Vector tube, Vektorröhre 817. 
Velocities, composition, Geschwindigkeiten, 
Zusammensetzung 202. 
Velocity, Geschwindigkeit 6, 25, 200, 201, 328. 
Velocity field in four dimensions, Geschwindigkeitsfeld in vier Dimensionen 456-457. 
Velocity gradient in four dimensions, Geschwindigkeitsgradient in vier Dimensionen 461. 
Velocity potential, Geschwindigkeitspotential 
357. 
Velocity potential theorem of LAGRANGE and 
CAUCHY, Geschwindigkeitspotential, 
Lagrange-Cauchyscher Satz 421, 712. 
Velocity of transport, Transportgeschwindigkeit 30. 
Velocity vector, Geschwindigkeitsvektor 139, 
201, 200. 
Velocity of light in a dielectric, Lieh/gegeschwindigkeit im Dielektrikum 739. 
- of light in vacuum, im Vakuum 679. 
902 Subject Index. 
Velocity, physical components, Geschwindigkeit, physikalische Komponente 26. 
- of sound see speed of sound. 
Vessel, reaction of its content upon it, Gefäß, 
Einwirkung seines Inhalts darauf 539. 
Virial theorem, Virialsatz 573. 
Virtual displacement, virtuelle Verrückung 
596-597. 
Virtual work, virtuelle Arbeit 595-600. 
Visco-elastic theories, viskoelastische Theorien 
733-734, 740. 
Viscosities of a fluid, Viskositätskoelfizienten 
einer Flüssigkeit 717. 
Viscosity of a fluid, linear, lineare Viskosität 
einer Flüssigkeit 715-716. 
- -, non-linear, nichtlineare 720-722. 
Viscous fluid, zähe Flüssigkeit 233. 
VoLTERRA's electromagnetic constitutive 
equations, Voltenasche elektromagnetische 
Materialgleichungen 7 40. 
Volume change at a shock, Votumänderung 
an einer Stoßfront 521. 
Volume element, deformation, Volumelement, 
Deformation 247-249, 266. 
- -, material derivative, materielle Ableitung 341-342. 
Volume integrals, kineniatics, Volumintegrale, Kinematik 347. 
Volume strain, Votumdilatation 266. 
Volume, material, materielles Volumen 339. 
VON MISEs' theorem on circulation preserving motion, von Misesscher Satz über zirkulationserhaltende Bewegung 430. 
Vortex line, Wirbellinie 386. 
Vortex sheet, Wirbelblatt 512, 514, 519-522. 
- -.material, materielles 515-517. 
Vortex tube, Wirbelröhre 386. 
Vortices and sources as elements of motion, 
Wirbel und Quellen als Bewegungselemente 
364-365. 
Vorticity averages, Wirbelmittelwerte 396 to 
402. 
Vorticity formula of CAUCHY, Wirbelformel 
von Cauchy 421. 
Vorticity moments, Wirbelmomente 400 to 
401, 415. 
Vorticity number, dynamical, dynamisches 
Wirbelmaß 379. 
- -, kinematical, kinematisches Wirbelmaß 
363-364, 382, 403-404. 
Vorticity tensor in four dimensions, Wirbeltensor in vier Dimensionen 461. 
Vorticity theorem of n'ALEMBERT for plane 
motion, Wirbelsatz von d'Alembert für 
ebene Bewegung 421. 
- of SvANBERG for rotationally symmetric motion, von Svanberg für rotationssymmetrische Bewegung 421. 
Vorticity theorems of HELMHOLTZ, Wirbelsätze von Helmholtz 386-387, 389. 
Vorticity vector, Wirbelvekto1' 354, 385-386. 
Wave, definition, Welle, Definition 508. 
Wave velocity, Wellengeschwindigkeit 134, 
201, 215, 216. 
Waves of constant action, Wellen konstanter 
Wirkung 123. 
Waves in a coherent system, Wellen in einem 
kohilrenten System 134. 
- in an elastic body, im elastischen Körper 
726-727. -, various definitions, verschiedene Definitionen 529. 
- in a viscous fluid, in einer viskosen Flüssigkeit 719-720. 
WEBER's transformation, Webersehe Transformation 422-424. 
WEINGARTEN's first theorem on discontinuities, Weingartenscher erster Satz über Unstetigkeiten 494. 
WEINGARTEN's second theorem on discontinuities, Weingartenscher zweiter Satz 
über Unstetigkeiten 496. 
Welding see fracture. 
WHITEHEAD's theory of gravitation, Whiteheadsche Gravitationstheorie 2. 
World acceleration vector, Weltbeschleunigungsvektor 461. 
World invariant form of CAUCHY's laws of 
motion, lorentzinvariante Form der Cauchyschen Bewegungsgleichungen 555. 
World invariant conservation laws, lorentzinvariante Erhaltungssätze 69 5-697. 
World invariant kinematics, lorentzinvariante 
Kinematik 452-463. 
World line, Weltlinie 6. 
World material derivative, materielle Ableitung im Raum-Zeit-Kontinuum 463. 
World-tensor, Welttensor 456. 
of the aether relations, der Ätherrelationen 
679-680. 
form of energy balance, Energiebilanz in 
vierdimensionaler Tensorform 611. 
World-tensor representation of polarization 
and magnetization, Welttensor-Darstellung von Polarisation und Magnetisierung 
686-689. 
World-tensor of stretching, Welttensor der 
Streckung 458, 463. 
World velocity field, Weltgeschwindigkeitsfeld 
456-457. 
World velocity gradient, Weltgeschwindigkeitsgradient 461. 
World vorticity tensor, Weltwirbeltensor 461. 
Work, Arbeit 42. 
Workless reaction of constraints, Zwangskräfte ohne Arbeitsleistung 38, 43, 57. 
Yield, Fließen 722. 
Yield function, Fließfunktion 722. 
Yield stress, Fließspannung 722. 
ZoRAWSKI's criterion of flux conservation, 
Zorawskisches Kriterium für Erhaltung 
des Flusses 346. 
ZoRAWSKI's theorem on relative motion, 
Zorawskischer Satz über die Relativbewegung 440. 
https://web.archive.org/web/20250528092718/https://smallpdf-production-files.0eb7351a55248d53ef0d306ef341ddfd.r2.cloudflarestorage.com/8a54aeab168a46798c52285a7eade0dc.pdf?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=233e3f4276e9a9d218be498fbe2a10dc%2F20250528%2Fauto%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20250528T092717Z&X-Amz-Expires=900&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&response-content-disposition=attachment%3B%20filename%3D%22principles_of_classical_mechanics_and_field_theory_%20j_%20l_%20synge_s_%20fluegge-pages.pdf%22%3B%20filename%2A%3DUTF-8%27%27principles_of_classical_mechanics_and_field_theory_%2520j_%2520l_%2520synge_s_%2520fluegge-pages.pdf&response-content-type=application%2Fpdf&x-id=GetObject&X-Amz-Signature=5bdf5b35d79d5e9ff4acce8ac7b2607f7ea0fab1f0c553848a9258b755af6efd